
                              2 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 3, 2012 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

EIGHT Questions

BYLINE: Dan Balz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 2215 words

1What's at stake in the first debate?

First debates usually attract the biggest audience, and so for President Obama
and Republican nominee Mitt Romney, this is a high-stakes event. But it's
clearly much bigger for Romney.

The race remains close in a number of national polls, including the latest
Washington Post-ABC News survey, which showed Obama ahead, 49 percent to 47
percent, among likely voters. But recent surveys in many of the battleground
states indicate that Obama has a larger lead there.

Republican strategist Brett O'Donnell notes that both campaigns are competing
for a small slice of undecided voters in the swing states, and he framed the
opening debate this way:

"Can Mitt Romney convince those voters that President Obama is to blame for
present economic conditions and that things are getting worse, or can President
Obama convince voters that we're headed in the right direction and to change now
would endanger a fragile recovery? The first debate - and the first 30 minutes
of the first debate - are the most important."

The past few weeks have not been good for Romney. Given that the Republican must
win virtually all the battleground states to amass 270 electoral votes, the
president will walk onstage Wednesday at the University of Denver as the
perceived leader. That puts the onus on Romney to win their first face-off.

As Democratic strategist Tad Devine said of the challenger, "He is running out
of runway."

Romney is receiving a lot of advice - be aggressive, be presidential, attack,
offer a vision, provide details, show empathy. But there is only so much he can
do in 90 minutes. Above all, he needs to emerge from the first debate with a
performance that makes voters take a fresh look at him - and have new doubts
about the president.

2 What are winning debate  strategies for Obama and Romney?

The strategy that helped Romney win many of the Republican primary debates isn't
the strategy he needs in Denver. In those debates, he tacked to the right
against conservative opponents. In this debate, he'll need to reach to the
center and hope he doesn't rile his base.

A GOP strategist offered this advice: "He can't be in your face or over the top
but has to challenge Obama, show off his knowledge of the economy . . . and get
across that he knows what buttons to push, he knows how to fix this and Obama
has failed at every turn. No pressure."

Romney also must soften an image that took a hit with his comment about the 47
percent of Americans who don't pay federal income taxes. He said they consider
themselves "victims" and have become dependent on government.

"He needs people to wonder if the case against him is so badly flawed that they
should reexamine his programs," said Samuel Popkin, a political science
professor at the University of California at San Diego.

GOP strategist Matt Schlapp said: "Romney's strategy is to pierce the thin skin
of the president and still find a way to improve his favorables. Like Mister
Rogers with a knife under his cardigan."

Advice for the president is more consistent: avoid looking arrogant, even
against an opponent he seems not to respect; avoid engaging Romney; avoid
attacking Romney; avoid talking too much about the past. "He doesn't need to
score a knockout or even win on points," Democratic strategist Matt Bennett
said. "He just needs to avoid a big mistake."

Above all, Obama must channel some of the arguments about the economy that
former president Bill Clinton made at the Democratic convention. Lynn Vavreck,
an associate professor of political science at the University of California at
Los Angeles, said he must make people believe the economy is getting better.

3Can a debate really change a presidential race?

There are lots of examples of debates that swayed races. So Romney has an
opportunity to come out of the first debate with perceptions changed.

Ronald Reagan lost his train of thought in his closing statement in his first
debate in 1984, giving Democrat Walter Mondale an opening. Al Gore's sighing in
his first debate against Republican George W. Bush in 2000 changed views of that
race. Democrat John F. Kerry picked up a head of steam after out-dueling Bush in
their first debate in 2004.

Whether such forums really change elections is another question. On this,
opinions are varied.

Some analysts say debates can affect the outcome. The best example may be those
first televised exchanges between John F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon, in which
Kennedy won on style. That may have been enough to tip one of the closest
elections in history in his direction.

But many other analysts say debates may change things temporarily but don't
really alter the race. They note that Mondale went on to lose by the biggest
electoral margin in history, and that Kerry had a series of good debate
performances but still lost.

"Debates only sometimes move the polls, and they rarely, if ever, decide the
winner of a presidential race," said John Sides, an associate professor of
political science at George Washington University.

Still, in any close election, which both sides expect this one to be, everything
can matter - television ads, turnout machinery and even debates.

4Who is considered the better debater, Romney or Obama?

Romney. Obama. Obama. Romney. Ask the experts, from campaign strategists to
political scientists, and you will receive a split decision.

Some of them say that neither is a particularly good debater. They argue that
Romney may have won most of the GOP debates this year, but he faced a weak
field, while Hillary Rodham Clinton was a better debater than Obama during the
Democratic primary contest in 2008.

Both Obama and Romney have demonstrated good debating skills, and both became
better with experience gained during their nomination battles. Romney won the
debates that mattered most, and Obama helped seal his victory with a strong
performance in his first debate against John McCain in 2008.

Those who give Romney the edge say it's because he has been through so many
debates this year that he's fully tuned up. Some see him as more disciplined as
a debater and less thin-skinned than the incumbent - although that doesn't mean
he can't be thrown on the defensive. Recall his exchanges with Rick Perry in the
GOP debates.

Obama, having not debated in four years, may be a little rustier than the
challenger. Democratic pollster Celinda Lake noted that Obama is known more for
motivational speaking than for debating.

Those who give the president the edge say he's well briefed, smooth and, when on
his game, unruffled. "Obama stays on message in debates, describes problems and
policies in shorthand and smiles while using the scalpel," said Rick Sloan,
communications director for the International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers.

5Does the more open format favor either of the candidates?

The first and last presidential debates will feature a more open format. The
exchanges will be divided into six 15-minute blocks. "PBS's NewsHour" Executive
Editor Jim Lehrer, who will moderate Wednesday's debate, has announced the
topics for the six blocks: economy, economy, economy, health care, the role of
government and governing.

After an opening question and responses from the candidates, the moderator will
have the remaining time to dig deeper, prompt direct engagement and pin down
someone who tries to slip off the hard questions.

Reed Galen, a Republican strategist, noted that neither candidate "is best when
given the opportunity to just talk and talk." But each can try to take advantage
of the format to help make his case.

A Democratic strategist said he thinks that the open format gives Obama "more
time to pick apart the Romney record." Other Democrats consider Obama better on
his feet. Republicans say the format could help Romney look presidential and
come across as warmer and more likable - a major goal for him.

The second of the three presidential debates will be a town-hall-meeting format,
with most questions from voters rather than the moderator. Bill Clinton used
this to his advantage in 1992, after George H.W. Bush was caught on camera
checking his watch as if he were in a hurry to finish. In that debate, Bush
stumbled over a question about the economy. Clinton stepped forward and gave an
"I feel your pain" answer that carried the evening.

Both Obama and Romney have had experience with town hall formats on the campaign
trail, although mostly from friendly participants. The key for both will be to
connect with the audience.

6How can these encounters produce the "big debate" that both candidates say they
want?

This is a big election, but it has not been a big campaign. There are major
differences between Obama and Romney, and between Democrats and Republicans, as
the polarized debate in Washington shows. But small issues and sideshows have
often dominated the race.

"Let's be serious," Vavreck said. "Neither of them really wants the 'big debate.
' If they did, they'd be bringing rhetoric to the campaign that portends a big
debate on something important, anything important."

"Lincoln-Douglas was a big debate series," said Steve Murphy, referring to the
exchanges in 1858 between Senate candidate Abraham Lincoln and incumbent Stephen
Douglas. "There are rarely big debates these days. Candidates are not nearly as
intellectually honest, and they are trained like doctors - first do no harm."

Romney's choice of Paul Ryan as his running mate suggested that the campaign
might include a more elevated debate about the government's role, the future of
entitlement programs and the best way to ensure robust economic growth.  It
hasn't happened, and it may be up to the debate moderators to try to prod the
candidates to spend less time on stock lines and well-practiced rhetoric and
have a real dialogue about the future.

"If [the moderator] stops the candidates from reverting to their talking points
and rehearsed attack lines and pivots, it's possible that something resembling a
great debate will take place," said Nicolle Wallace, who was White House
communications director for President George W. Bush.

Alan Abramowitz, a political science professor at Emory University, agreed. "The
moderators need to press both candidates to expand on their positions on major
issues to get them beyond their talking points," he said.

7What should we expect from the debate between Vice President Biden and GOP vice
presidential candidate Paul Ryan?

Vice presidential debates are generally about the presidential candidates. The
job of the running mates, as Joel Goldstein of St. Louis University put it, is
to echo the themes of the campaign, attack the opposing presidential candidate
and defend the top of the ticket. They also must establish their credentials.

But sometimes these debates are about the running mates as much as the
presidential candidates, and that's the case this year. Next week's debate
between Biden and Ryan may be as eagerly anticipated as Biden's debate with
Sarah Palin four years ago.

Sloan offered a pithy prediction of the debate: "Verbal shillelaghs at six feet,
last solid crack wins."

Ryan, a congressman from Wisconsin, will come to the stage with a history as a
major intellectual force in the conservative movement. His budget blueprint was
an issue in the campaign even before he was added to the ticket, and it will be
an issue in his debate.

Biden has been in elective office for almost four decades, and there's little he
hasn't encountered. But Ryan knows the budget and fiscal issues in ways Biden
may not. "I think it will be the first time in history that the Republican
candidate will be favored," said Daron Shaw, a professor at the University of
Texas at Austin.

But Ryan has never been on a stage this big. Biden should have the advantage on
foreign policy.

The key will be when Biden goes after Ryan's budget. Said Democratic strategist
Kiki McLean: "Folks will be watching Ryan and looking for any daylight between
him and Romney or any effort to protect his own image over Romney's."

8What are Obama's and Romney's most memorable moments from past debates?

Obama and Romney have been in dozens of debates over the past five years. The
strategists and scholars who offered views for this package cited several for
Romney: his GOP primary debate in Florida against Newt Gingrich, when he
staggered his opponent by noting that the former House speaker had investments
in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; his skillful destruction of Rick Santorum in the
Arizona debate; and the bet he dared Rick Perry to take: "Rick, I'll tell you
what, 10,000 bucks?"

For Obama, there is a memorable moment almost everyone cited, and it wasn't one
he should be proud of. It came days before the New Hampshire primary in January
2008, when one of the questioners asked Hillary Clinton about perceptions that
she was not very likable.

Clinton parried as deftly as she could, pretending to be hurt. Obama tried to
offer a bit of encouragement, but what he said came off as snide and
condescending: "You're likable enough, Hillary."

His comment no doubt helped cost him the primary and gave Clinton new life.
Romney also suffers from perceptions that he's not as likable as the president.
Obama should have that moment from 2008 in mind if and when the issue comes up
at one of this year's debates.

balzd@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
