
                              14 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

Debate shakes up presidential race;
Romney, buoyant, says the TV face-off was a contrast of 'two visions'

BYLINE: MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: DENVER


After weeks of trailing President Barack Obama in polls in key states and
several Republican missteps, a reinvigorated Mitt Romney and excited Republicans
marveled at an energetic, aggressive performance during his first-ever
general-election debate.

In a 90-minute debate watched by tens of millions of Americans on television on
Wednesday, Mr. Romney accused Mr. Obama of failing to lead the United States out
of recession and presented himself as an equal who could solve problems that
have defied Mr. Obama; the president, appearing weary and at times impatient,
argued that his policies were showing results but needed more time.

At an impromptu appearance on Thursday morning in front of a group of Colorado
conservative activists, Mr. Romney said the debate was a contrast of ''two
visions'' and said it was ''helpful to be able to describe those visions.''

At the gathering, Mr. Romney reprised his lines from the debate, saying that Mr.
Obama's vision for the United States was of ''trickle-down government'' and
criticized Mr. Obama as misleading the public about his plans to cut the
deficit.

''Only in Washington would you count $4 trillion in reduction when in fact his
plan calls for adding $1 trillion in debt every one of the next four years,''
Mr. Romney said.

He also mentioned Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.'s comments about the middle
class having been ''buried'' during the last four years - a word he used during
the debate on Wednesday.

''If we continue down his path,'' Mr. Romney said, ''there's no question that
the middle class, which the vice president noted has been buried, will continue
to be buried with higher and higher expenses for gasoline for food for utilities
for health insurance.''

On Twitter, some of Mr. Obama's Democratic allies expressed anger and
disappointment that he did not make better use of the ''47 percent'' speech by
Mr. Romney and other missteps that the Democratic campaign has spent months
honing into attack ads and campaign speeches.

Andrew Sullivan, a blogger and strong supporter of Mr. Obama, echoed Peggy
Noonan, a former Republican speechwriter, on Twitter, saying that ''this is a
rolling calamity for Obama.'' Mr. Sullivan added: ''He's boring, abstract, and
less human-seeming than Romney!''

And Bill Maher, the liberal comedian who had donated $1 million to a ''Super
PAC'' backing Mr. Obama, joked, ''I can't believe I'm saying this, but Obama
looks like he does need a teleprompter.''

Stephen F. Hayes of the conservative magazine Weekly Standard wrote after the
debate: ''In a thoroughly dominating performance, Romney bested Barack Obama in
both tone and substance. Obama often found himself at the end of a verbal
cul-de-sac, seemingly unaware of how he'd ended up there.''

At this point, it remains unclear whether these snap assessments and others made
immediately after the debate will be matched by the more sober judgments of
voters in the upcoming days. Voters sometimes surprise the analysts by coming to
different conclusions about the outcome of a presidential debate.

And Mr. Obama's top strategists predicted that some of Mr. Romney's answers - in
particular, his admissions about the need for a voucher system for Medicare -
would deepen the concern in some communities about his policies.

The candidates immediately headed out to the campaign trail, where Mr. Romney
will have to find a way to turn the positive reviews from the debate into a
sustained push that changes the dynamic of the race. He was expected to campaign
in Virginia on Thursday night with his vice-presidential running mate,
Representative Paul D. Ryan.

The debate was designed to be wonkish, and it did not disappoint. By giving the
candidates 15 minutes - or more - to discuss each topic, the debate provided
plenty of long-winding answers filled with sometimes mind-numbing statistics.

It might have made the exchange boring in the eyes of voters who have come to
expect short and fast-paced political combat. There were almost no ''zingers''
designed to embarrass the other candidate or create a bumper-sticker moment.

Those kinds of ''gotcha'' moments have sometimes changed the course of an
election, as did President Gerald Ford's inaccurate contention that there had
never been any Soviet domination of Eastern Europe. Without such a moment,
Wednesday's debate may have less impact.

But the perceived imbalance between the two performances seemed certain to
provide at least a temporary bump for Mr. Romney, who had been struggling to
reinvigorate a somewhat faltering campaign during the past several weeks. Before
the debate, Mr. Romney was trailing slightly in national polls and by larger
margins in some battleground states.

Republicans, declaring Mr. Romney the clear winner of the debate, predicted that
his performance would help him win the election in just over a month.

Even Democratic pollsters said that focus groups they convened during the debate
were impressed by Mr. Romney and somewhat surprised by Mr. Obama's lack of an
aggressive performance. In a memo released on Thursday morning, the Democratic
polling firm of Greenberg Quinlan Rosner concluded that Mr. Romney had a good
night.

''The dial testing and follow-up discussions showed Mitt Romney performing well,
improving his personal appeal and a number of important attributes,'' the firm
concluded.

''Obama also impressed the group, but not to the same degree as Romney. However,
the research does not suggest that Romney fundamentally changed the political
calculus in this election,'' the firm said.

Both campaigns quickly used the debate to try to raise money for the last month
of the race.

In an e-mail sent just after 1 a.m. on the East Coast, Mr. Obama wrote to his
supporters: ''I hope I made you proud out there explaining the vision we share
for this country. Now we need to go win this election - the most important thing
that will happen tonight is what you do (or don't do) to help in the little time
we have left.''

Earlier in the evening, Mr. Ryan and Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida,
sent e-mails seeking donations for Mr. Romney's campaign.

''After watching tonight's debate, the choice this November could not be
clearer,'' Mr. Rubio said. ''A vote for Barack Obama is a vote for four more
years of economic stagnation and weak foreign policy; as well as higher taxes,
debt, and health care costs.''

And by Thursday morning, the campaigns and their allies at the Democratic and
Republican National Committees had produced YouTube videos that they hoped would
help spread their message about the debate online.

Mr. Obama's campaign released a video called ''Mostly Fiction,'' in which it
accuses Mr. Romney of playing ''fast and loose'' with the truth during the
debate.

''The sharpest observers saw beyond Romney's 'zingers' and witnessed him looking
in the eye of those he expects to elect him and tell outright lies about his
record on several occasions - at least 12 times,'' the campaign said in a news
release that accompanied the video.

Republicans produced one called ''Smirk,'' which showed Mr. Obama's reaction
during much of the debate. In the video, he is shown looking down with a grimace
on his face, or smirking while Mr. Romney talks about the failures of Mr.
Obama's administration.

In the Democratic video, ''What a Guy,'' the Democratic committee shows Mr.
Romney running roughshod over the moderator of the debate, Jim Lehrer, at
several points.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
