
                              93 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                             The Gazette (Montreal)

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

More aggressive Obama goes on offensive; President invokes themes of honesty,
integrity as he calls out Mitt Romney

BYLINE: WILLIAM MARSDEN, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; William Marsden; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


A more forceful and assertive U.S. President Barack Obama emerged from the ashes
of his Denver debacle Tuesday in a town hall-style debate dominated by questions
about the country's struggling economy, national security and its
trillion-dollar budget deficits.

Obama appeared more at ease than he was in the Denver debate where his handlers
claim he was caught off guard by Republican rival Mitt Romney and his sudden
conversion from a self-proclaimed "severe conservative" to the middle ground.

In this debate at Hofstra University in Long Island, Obama aggressively called
out Romney for major policy flip-flops and in so doing indirectly invoked the
themes of integrity and honesty before an estimated television audience of more
than 65 million people. Missed opportunities to counter his rival in Denver were
not missed in Long Island.

When the first questioner asked what his prospects were to get a job after
university, Obama said the country needs manufacturing jobs and noted that
Romney would have shut down the U.S. automotive industry instead of using
government aid to stem bankruptcy.

Romney said his five-point plan will create 12 million jobs.

Obama responded: "What Gov. Romney just said just isn't true." He added that
Romney wanted to take the automakers into bankruptcy, but had no plan to get
them out of it.

"Gov. Romney doesn't have a five-point plan; he has a one-point plan," he said,
adding that it's a plan to make the rich richer and squeeze the middle class.

With national polls giving Romney a widening lead, Obama was under the gun to
show that he deserves four more years to right the U.S. economy and secure
foreign policy gains.

Fielding questions from an audience of about 80 undecided voters on both
domestic and foreign-policy issues, Obama and Romney outlined the main
differences in their policies.

Romney appeared in a holding position, performing little different from Denver
in style and substance. He pitched his policy of cutting taxes for middle-and
upper-income families by $4.8 trillion, claiming the savings would help boost
the economy and ultimately pay down the debt.

Despite recent improvements in employment, housing and retail, Romney insisted
that Obama's policies have failed and that the country needs to embark on a
whole new path.

Observers had speculated the town hall format of Tuesday night's debate could
change the game - perhaps to Obama's disadvantage - by making it more difficult
for him directly to attack Romney.

Ron Kaufman, a senior Romney adviser, said the pressure was on Obama to perform
while Romney had to stick with his message that he offers a completely different
view of the U.S.

"This is a clear-choice election. Barack Obama is an honest liberal, old-school
democrat politician who believes in a paternal government who wants to take care
of your problems and tax you more, and does more for you. And Mitt Romney is
just the opposite. He is a man who believes the greatness of the country is in
individuals and gives them more of their own money to make more of their own
decisions and that's what makes this country great. And this difference is true
in every single policy area."

Patrick Gaspard, executive director of the Democratic National Committee, said
that during the Denver debate Romney, who previously described himself as a
"severe conservative," put on "a spectacular performance during which he
disavowed just about every position he had staked over the last two years."

The polling company Gallup chose the participants in the town hall debate by
lottery. Some were students. (Domino's Pizza offered any student free pizza for
life if he or she asked the candidates "do you prefer pepperoni or sausage on
your pizza?" No takers, but Domino's got its news bite.)

Gallup's national poll Tuesday showed Romney had taken the lead 50 to 46 per
cent and that his campaign was on a roll.

But many experts say national polls are meaningless in a close race.

The real score is at state level, specifically in the swing states of Ohio and
Florida. where both candidates are spending millions of dollars in ad money.

Presidential elections are not won by the national popular vote, but by a
state-by-state tally of what are called Electoral College votes. The candidate
who wins the popular vote in each state is awarded the allotted electoral
college votes to that state.

Democrats have traditionally won most of the states with the highest number of
these votes. These include California (with 55 electoral college votes), New
York (29) and Illinois (20). Other large states such as Pennsylvania (20) and
Michigan (16) normally lean toward the Democrats as they continue to do now.

The Republicans' only big-number state is Texas with 38 electoral college votes.
Otherwise they rely on 18 small states to build up their numbers.

In the middle are the swing states such as Ohio (18 votes) and Florida (29). It
is generally believed that unless Romney can take Ohio, he'll lose.

As of Tuesday, these electoral college numbers favoured Obama even after his
flat performance in the first debate.

They showed Obama leading with 277 to Romney's 239. Needed to win the White
House: 270.

Polls showed Obama's Ohio numbers remained steady. He had a four-to five-point
lead.

Obama's ads in the battleground states tell voters to "stick with this guy, he
will move us forward."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SAUL LOEB,  AFP, GETTY IMAGES; Barack Obama challenged some Mitt Romney
statements: "What Gov. Romney just said just isn't true.";

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Column

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Gazette, a division of CanWest MediaWorks Publication Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
