
                              3 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

BYLINE: Dan Balz;David Nakamura

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 1659 words

DATELINE: BOCA RATON, FLA.


BOCA RATON, Fla. - President Obama and Mitt Romney clashed repeatedly over
foreign policy here Monday night, with the president arguing assertively that
Romney lacks the consistency or clarity of vision to lead the country while the
Republican nominee charged that Obama has been weak and ineffective in the face
of growing turmoil in the world.

The two candidates differed most sharply over the president's handling of the
uprisings in the Middle East, his efforts to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear
weapons and his treatment of Israel. But often they seemed to find common ground
on some of the policies the administration is pursuing.

With the debates now over, the candidates and their campaigns begin a two-week
sprint to Election Day. The campaigns will be focused on a relative handful of
states, with two objectives: winning over the few remaining undecided voters
with a last barrage of television ads and intensifying efforts to get their
supporters to the polls - either during early-voting periods or on Nov. 6.

The focus of the last of their three debates was supposed to be foreign policy,
but both Romney and Obama used their time to talk about the issues most
important to voters: jobs, the economy and the budget. They talked about the
auto bailout, school class sizes and Romney's tax plan. At several points, CBS's
Bob Schieffer, who served as moderator, tried to bring them back to foreign
affairs and national security, but sometimes to no avail.

Romney appeared cautious, especially during the early stages of the debate, but
grew more assertive as the evening went on. Throughout the debate, Obama seemed
eager and ready to take the fight to his opponent, using his experience to draw
contrasts with the challenger. At times, as Romney offered pointed criticism of
his policies, Obama glared directly at him.

Romney's central critique was that the president has been weak in the face of "a
rising tide of chaos" and tumult in the world. When Obama charged that Romney
has been "all over the map" in his policies, the challenger responded by saying,
"Attacking me is not talking about how we're going to deal with the challenges
that exist in the Middle East."

But Obama pressed his case that Romney's worldview as well as his prescriptions
for the domestic front are not just wrong but also rooted in the past. "When it
comes to our foreign policy, you seem to want to import the foreign policies of
the 1980s, just like the social policies of the 1950s and the economic policies
of the 1920s," he said.

Although the two laid out some differences, Romney was less assertive in making
distinctions with the president than he has been in some of his more robust
foreign policy speeches along the campaign trail.

The final debate concluded a gripping series of encounters between the two
candidates that shook up the campaign as dramatically as any recent debates.
Romney used the first faceoff to greatest advantage with an aggressive
performance that contrasted with a lackluster evening for the president. Obama
rebounded in the second debate, which was marked by sharp and testy exchanges
between the candidates, but not so much as to reverse the gains Romney had made.

The three-week period, which included a debate between Vice President Biden and
Romney's running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan (Wis.), began with Obama holding a small
lead nationally and a bigger lead in some of the battleground states. The debate
season ended Monday with national polls showing a dead heat and the
battlegrounds increasingly tight.

A new Washington Post-ABC News poll, the start of what will be daily tracking of
the race over the final two weeks, showed Obama at 49 percent and Romney at 48
percent. Two weeks ago, the Post-ABC poll had Obama at 49 percent and Romney at
46 percent.

Obama and Romney touched on many of the major areas of tension in the world,
from the civil war in Syria to the killings of four Americans in Libya. They
discussed the war in Afghanistan and the rise of China. But it was on Iran and
Israel where their differences and agreements came through most clearly.

As he has on the campaign trail, Romney focused much of his criticism of Obama's
Middle East policy on his handling of Iran's nuclear weapons program, warning
repeatedly that Tehran has moved "four years closer" to its goal because the
president has not been tough enough to deter it.

He contended that Obama's "apology tour" of Muslim countries during his first
year in office, which did not include a stop in Israel, signaled a sign of
American weakness.

The president's actions sent a message to the Iranian mullahs "that, hey, you
know, we can keep on pushing along here. We can keep talks going on, but we're
just going to keep on spinning centrifuges," Romney said. "Now there are some
10,000 centrifuges spinning uranium, preparing to create a nuclear threat to the
United States and to the world."

Romney has used the argument to appeal to Jewish voters, especially here in
Florida, who have been critical of the White House's posture toward Israel's
national security. But Obama, sensitive to the critique, appeared to anticipate
the line of attack, referring proactively to his commitment to Israel's defense.

After Romney pointed out that the president had not stopped in Israel while in
office, Obama quickly shot back, noting that he had visited the country as a
candidate four years ago and "did not take donors and did not attend
fundraisers." The remark was a rebuke of Romney's trip to Israel this summer,
which included time raising money for his campaign.

Obama pointed out that during his trip in 2008, he visited Holocaust memorial
Yad Vashem to "remind myself of the nature of evil and why our bond with Israel
will be unbreakable."

And he called the notion of an "apology tour" the "biggest whopper" told during
the campaign season, having been discounted by "fact-checkers and reporters."

"If Israel is attacked, America will stand with Israel," Obama pledged.

Although the two had argued at last week's debate about what happened at a U.S.
diplomatic compound in Libya and whether the administration had been slow to
identify the attack as an act of terrorism, the issue never got a full airing on
Monday.

At one point, Romney argued that he would not support budget cuts to the
military, pointing out that the Navy has reduced its fleet of warships to the
lowest number since the early 1900s.

"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets," the president
countered, "because the nature of our military's changed. We have these things
called aircraft carriers where planes land on them. We have these ships that go
underwater, nuclear submarines."

The competitiveness of the race with just two weeks remaining was underscored by
the new Post-ABC News survey showing a statistical tie and signs that Romney is
now running even with Obama in the swing states.

Behind those numbers is a sizable gender gap - as large as it has been in
Post-ABC national polling during this campaign. Female voters break 56 to 42
percent for the president; men go 54 to 42 percent for Romney.

White voters side with Romney by a 15-point margin (56 to 41 percent), while
non-whites break heavily for the president, 78 to 19 percent. Among African
Americans, the margin is overwhelming: 94 to 2 percent.

The seesawing battle for voters now has Obama with the edge on enthusiasm: 64
percent of his backers say they are "very enthusiastic" about his candidacy,
higher than the 58 percent of Romney's who are that engaged with his run. Still,
Obama's popularity trails his 2008 levels.

The new poll also showed the two candidates at parity in a basic test of
popularity: The number of voters with favorable impressions of Romney is on par
with the number with positive views of Obama (50 to 52 percent). However, the
president maintains the edge in "strongly favorable" ratings.

Obama has a campaign-high 11-point edge over Romney on handling taxes, a
12-point lead on Medicare and a 13-point advantage on "women's issues." He has a
seven-point edge when it comes to understanding the economic problems people are
having and is still widely viewed as doing more to help the middle class than
the wealthy, the opposite of how voters see Romney.

In advance of Monday's debate, the poll showed Romney now rivaling Obama when it
comes to dealing with international affairs and terrorism. Romney also runs
about evenly with the president as voters' pick for who is the better commander
in chief.

Obama spent the weekend at Camp David preparing for the final debate, arriving
in Florida on Monday afternoon. On Tuesday, he will begin a cross-country blitz
that will take him to almost every important battleground state, a reflection
both of the limited time left before Election Day and the tightening polls, both
nationally and in the battlegrounds.

Billed by the campaign as a two-day, nonstop "America Forward tour,'' Obama is
scheduled to barnstorm through Ohio, Florida, Virginia, Iowa, Colorado and
Nevada. He will also make a detour on Wednesday to California, which is
considered safely in his column, for an appearance on NBC's "The Tonight Show
With Jay Leno."

Romney prepared extensively for the foreign policy debate, coming off the
campaign trail on Saturday for three days of prep sessions at a waterfront hotel
in nearby Delray Beach, Fla.

His top political and policy advisers were with him, as was Sen. Rob Portman of
Ohio, who played Obama in the mock debates and has become an increasingly
influential adviser to the nominee.

On Tuesday, Romney heads west to reunite with Ryan, staging joint rallies in
Nevada and Colorado; from there, Romney will campaign in Iowa and all-important
Ohio. Advisers said Romney will start delivering his closing argument to voters
this week, and he is considering making a major speech on debt and government
spending in the coming days.

balzd@washpost.com

nakamurad@washpost.com

Jerry Markon and Philip Rucker contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
