
                              4 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                                The New York Post

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday

America Decides Desperate Bam 'bombs' Romney But challenger stands his ground in
final bitter debate

BYLINE: S.A. Miller and Geoff Earle

SECTION: Late City Final; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1115 words


BOCA RATON, Fla. - Forget diplomacy, President Obama was dropping the bombs in
his final debate against Mitt Romney.

With the race on the line and polls shifting against him, Obama delivered his
most polished performance in the third and final debate - which focused on
foreign policy - as he repeatedly tried to trump Romney by playing the
commander-in-chief card.

"I know you haven't been in a position to actually execute foreign policy - but
every time you've offered an opinion, you've been wrong," Obama sniped.

Romney stood his ground.

"Attacking me is not an agenda," he said.

It was one of the Republican's best comebacks of the evening, reminding voters
that Obama has focused much of his campaign on tearing down Romney.

"Attacking me is not talking about how we're going to deal with the challenges
that exist in the Middle East, and take advantage of the opportunity there, and
stem the tide of this violence," Romney said.

Romney, with no experience in international affairs, got through the debate
without committing a gaffe. That may be enough for his campaign to call the
night a success, since Romney presented himself as a competent and capable
leader.

Obama aggressively went after Romney from the start, scoffing at his rival's
inexperience on global matters and hitting him with several stinging put-downs
early in the debate.

Obama chided Romney for purportedly saying that Russia - not terrorism - was the
biggest threat to America.

"The 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back," Obama quipped.

"The Cold War's been over for 20 years," he continued. "When it comes to our
foreign policy, you seem to want to import the foreign policies of the 1980s,
just like the social policies of the 1950s and the economic policies of the
1920s."

Obama appeared to have an arsenal of one-liners at the ready.

As Romney has often done on the campaign trail, he criticized the president's
planned $1 trillion in defense cuts by citing the shrinking US Navy.

"Our Navy is smaller now than at any time since 1917," Romney said, borrowing a
line from his stump speech.

Obama was ready for that one.

"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of
our military's changed," he said.

"We have these things called aircraft carriers, where planes land on them. We
have these ships that go underwater, nuclear submarines," he snarked.

"The question is not a game of Battleship, where we're counting ships."

Romney slammed Obama for his "apology tour," referring to speeches the president
made in the Middle East early in his term that Romney has described as critical
of the US role in the region.

Obama flat-out denied it.

"This has been probably the biggest whopper that's been told during this
campaign," he responded.

Romney failed to effectively hit Obama for the administration's conflicting
response to the terrorist attack on the US Consulate in Benghazi, which killed
US Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans.

Romney didn't press Obama on that tragic subject - considered a major
vulnerability - even when moderator Bob Schiefer brought it up.

Instead, Obama seized the opportunity and dug up the second- biggest corpse of
his administration, after Osama bin Laden: Libya's Moammar Khadafy.

"When it came time to making sure that Khadafy did not stay in power, that he
was captured, Governor, your suggestion was that this was mission creep, that
this was mission muddle," Obama said. "Imagine if we had pulled out at that
point. You know, Moammar Khadafy had more American blood on his hands than any
individual other than Osama bin Laden."

In a series of contentious exchanges, the two rivals clashed on a wide range of
fronts:

n  On Syria: Romney called for arming the rebels, but said, "We should be
playing the leadership role there, not on the ground with military. I don't want
to have our military involved in Syria."

"We are playing the leadership role," shot back Obama.

n  On Israel: Romney faulted Obama for never visiting the United States' closest
ally in the Middle East after his election. "You skipped Israel . . . but you
went to the other nations, and by the way, they noticed that you skipped
Israel."

A CNN/ORC poll of registered voters who watched the debate showed that 48
percent said Obama fared better, compared with 40 percent who said Romney had
the best showing.

Obama was hoping a strong performance on foreign policy would break Romney's
recent momentum in the polls.

---

BEST ZINGER

OBAMA "You mentioned the Navy, for example, and that we have fewer ships than we
did in 1916. Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets."

ROMNEY: "The president began what I have called an apology tour, of going to
various nations in the Middle East ... And by the way, they noticed you skipped
Israel."

PERSONAL ATTACKS

OBAMA: "You seem to want to import the foreign policies of the 1980s, just like
the social policies of the 1950s and the economic policies of the 1920s."

ROMNEY: "Attacking me is not talking about how we're going to deal with the
challenges that exist in the Middle East."

MISSED CHANCES

OBAMA: Never mentioned Romney's gaffe, when he questioned Olympic security.

ROMNEY: Barely brought up Benghazi consulate debacle.

STYLE

OBAMA: Combative, mocking Romney's foreign policy experience.

ROMNEY: Too agreeable, even backing some of Obama's policies.

MODERATOR FLUB

Bob Schieffer referring to "Obama's bin Laden."

---

TWITTER

Madeleine McAulay @m_mcaulay Obama: I stand with Israel, unless I get a better
offer . . . like The View.

Michael Moore @MMFlint Finally the foreign policy debate is back on topic
talking about a foreign place -Massachusetts!

Andy Borowitz @BorowitzReport Romney: "No one has more experience abroad than my
money." #debate

Bill Maher @billmaher Mitt, you do know that most of America thinks Mali is one
of Obama's daughters, right?

Jamie Dupree @jamiedupree I don't know who is winning the debate but the Giants
are up 7-0 and the Bears are winning 10-0

Dane Cook @DaneCook For those counting. Obama has blinked 468 times. Romney 11.

Julia Segal @juliasegal Bob Schieffer is the Brad Pitt of Boca Raton

She Ratchet[TM] @Ratchet2English Kanye West should interrupt this debate

Gladstone@WGladstone Either nothing was said in the last ten minutes of this
debate or I've just suffered a major stroke

@BuzzFeedJack Like The Godfather and Star Wars before it, this debate proves
that part three is always the least entertaining

Besty Fischer Martin @BetsyMTP The three B buzzwords from each debate 1) Big
Bird 2) Binders 3)Bayonets

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Barack Obama and Mitt Romney at the third presidential
debate. [AFP/Getty Images]

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
