
                              5 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                             hollywoodreporter.com

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Obama-Romney Final Debate: What the Pundits Are Saying

BYLINE: Kimberly Nordyke

SECTION: NEWS; TAG

LENGTH: 1096  words


President Obama and Mitt Romney faced off in their third and final debate Monday
night.


The event, held at Lynn Universityin Boca Raton, Fla., was moderated by Bob
Schieffer of CBS' Face the Nation, with the questions focused on foreign policy,
including Libya, Afghanistan and China, but also touched on domestic topics
including the economy.


PHOTOS: The Top Celebrity Political Twitter Commentators


With the previous two debates a draw -- Romney was overwhelmingly declared the
winner of the first, while Obama took the second -- who did the pundits think
won Monday night's showdown?


CNN's panel largely considered Obama the victor "on points," but varied when it
came to what the debate meant for the election. They also focused on Romney's
move to the center throughout the debate, with David Gergen noting Romney
"attacked the president from the left."


"This was a version of what mitt Romney did in the first debate. Romney
surprised Obama in the first debate by being more centrist," said CNN's Fareed
Zakaria "Except this time Obama was ready. He knew how to effectively counter
this."


Gloria Borger continued that train of thought on CNN.


"If there were a word cloud over Mitt Romney's head tonight, it would have been
peace&hellip;.Mitt Romney said unequivocally troops out of Afghanistan by 2014,"
though he previously he'd declined to set a definitive pull out date for the
country.


PHOTOS: 15 of the Best Election-Themed Movies


Democratic strategist James Carville wasn't impressed with Romney's energy.


"It seems like someone gave Romney the same drug someone gave the president
before the first debate," he said.


Fellow democrat Van Jones said on CNN Romney "did not pass the Comander in Chief
test."


"He was sweating, Nixonian style," Jones said. "He changed his
positions&hellip;. On Iraq. He changed his position on Afghanistan."


But former President George W. Bush Press Secretary Ari Fleischer disagreed with
the democrats on CNN's panel, saying even if the president "was more aggressive"
than Romney, and if one could argue Obama "won on points," the American people
would not particularly care about the debate, because they are focused on jobs,
not foreign policy


Echoing the polls, MSNBC's pundits mostly agreed that the final round went to
Obama, with many commenting on Romney's strategy to mostly agree with the
president's policies on various topics.


"How can he get away with running from his previous heartfelt beliefs?"
criticized MSNBC's Rachel Maddow. "I believe it's a character issue, and I find
it disheartening." She added: "We're going to see if this soulless shape
shifting has a cost."


PHOTOS: 20 Biggest Political Players in Hollywood


Her network colleague Al Sharpton agreed, pointing to the candidates' remarks
related to the war in Afghanistan.


"People can accept you changing your mind, but not at the risk of my behind," he
said. "We're talking about war. They are in Afghanistan now. .... [Romney] is
for agenda equality in the Middle East but not here in the U.S. He is for
democracy over there, but voter identification here. It's schizophrenia."


Echoed Chris Matthews: "How can a president be so nimble and flexible, a true
hawk on Afghanistan, and then basically be the same guy you're running against?
How do you do that in good conscience?"


MSNBC's Ed Schultz said he thinks Romney's strategy will pose a problem for
right-win conservatives.


"The ring wing will cause problems for Romney: We don't know this guy, how can
we trust him?" he said.


But Republican strategist Steve Schmidt, also on MSNBC, disagreed.


"Romney left this debate tonight fundamentally agreeing with Obama on foreign
policy on issue after issue, and I think it was effective," he said. "He
demonstrated circumspection and cautiousness, and those are the things that
people are looking for."


VIDEO: 5 Funniest Parodies of the Obama-Romney Debates


Fox News Channel's Megyn Kelly, meanwhile, questioned whether Romney "struggled"
to put distance between his and Obama's plans or if that was a calculated
strategy. She also noted each candidate's body language.


"Obama sat staring at Romney, and many wondered if he was made," she said. "
Romney was smiling most of the night and seeming, as Obama put it, like a happy
warrior."


Fox's Brit Hume, meanwhile, applauded Romney's performance.


"Romney came across as a plausible commander-in-chief," he said. "It would be
damaging if any questions had been raised that he didn't know anything about,
but I didn't detect any such moment. He was smooth and fluid. I don't think it
hurt that they didn't have any broad disagreements. I do think he did
effectively use the economy and the weakness of the economy as weapons in the
debate."


As for Obama, "I wouldn't describe him as having a mean look. I would describe
him as a man looking for the opportunity to strike. Romney had a more benign
default expression -- a slight smile, not smug -- and I wonder if that was not
more attractive because that's the thing that matters."


STORY: Polls: Obama Wins Third Debate By Landslide


Fox's Chris Wallace also praised Romney, saying if he had been on a deserted
island for the past several years, he would have thought the Republican
candidate was the incumbent.


"I would have thought that Romney was the president trying to protect a lead and
Obama was the challenger desperately trying to catch up," he said, adding that "
Romney was clearly not taking the bait and getting into a fight with Obama."


Steve Hays, also on Fox News, said Obama crossed a line in the first 10 minutes
"between aggressive and critical to downright disrespectful. He told Romney,
'I'm glad you recognize al-Qaeda as a threat.' Well, is there anyone who doesn't
recognize al-Qaeda as a threat? He crossed the line and risked being viewed as
unpresidential."


Democratic strategist Joe Trippi called the entire debate a "big hug because I
think that's what Romney was doing. He decided to hug Obama on policy after
policy. ... The president was very aggressive, and it's hard to win a debate if
you're not in aggressive mode. They switched roles [from the first debate], and
I think Obama had the edge."


On Twitter, Ann Coulter was harsh in her assessment, writing: "I highly approve
of Romney's decision to be kind and gentle to the retard." The Week's Marc
Ambinder questioned Romney's move to the center for this debate, tweeting"I get
Romney's strategy but he may forfeited too much. A lot of people watched." CNN's
Piers Morgan tweetedObama "narrowly won by by a musket or three. But Romney did
well too, and will have reassured people he's not a gun-toting, neocon cowboy."

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: ONLINE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                    Copyright 2012 VNU Business Media, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
