
                              7 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                            Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

ROUND 3: TWO WEEKS LEFT;
CANDIDATES SHIFT FOCUS FROM FOREIGN POLICY TO DOMESTIC ECONOMY IN FINAL DEBATE

BYLINE: James O'Toole, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

SECTION: NATIONAL; THE ROAD TO THE WHITE HOUSE; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1518 words


BOCA RATON, Fla. -- President Barack Obama and former Gov. Mitt Romney sparred
vigorously on often subtle differences on foreign policy Monday as they met in
the final debate of an agonizingly close race.

Mr. Obama worked to paint his opponent as an inexperienced and shifting voice on
international affairs. In sharp contrast to their first debate he was more often
the aggressor throughout the evening. Parrying those attacks, Mr. Romney often
shifted the focus to the domestic economy, arguing that American deficits and
lagging growth were national security threats as well as economic problems.

Mr. Romney repeatedly asserted that the United States was weaker now in the eyes
of the world because of administration lapses in the Middle East, and
particularly in the case of Iran. But he offered few specifics on how a Romney
agenda would differ from the incumbent's in dealing with trouble spots such as
Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The rivals sat next to one another at a table facing moderator Bob Schieffer,
the CBS chief Washington correspondent. While the 90 minutes included some sharp
exchanges and instances of the candidates talking over one another, it lacked
the raw, acerbic tone of their last encounter in the town hall format last week
at Hofstra University.

The evening started with a question on Libya, a subject of a raw exchange of
charges between the two campaigns over recent weeks. But Mr. Romney avoided his
previous attacks on the administration for lapses in security at the Benghazi
consulate and his campaign's persistent, sharp questioning over explanations of
the motives of the attack.

Instead he offered a broader, if less detailed indictment of the administration
policies, contending his opponent had failed to rise to the challenges of a
region in turmoil

Citing the dramatic transitions of the Arab Spring, he said, "What we're seeing
is a pretty dramatic reversal in the kind of hopes we had for that region."

He made an early point of congratulating Mr. Obama for the successful raid that
killed Osama bin Laden, but said, "We can't kill our way out of this mess."

"We're going to have to a very comprehensive and robust strategy to help the
world of Islam and other parts of the world reject this radical violent
extremism,'' he said.

"Gov. Romney, I'm glad you agree that we have been successful in going after
al-Qaida, but I have to tell you that, you know, your strategy previously has
been one that has been all over the map and is not designed to keep American
safe or to build on the opportunities that exist in the Middle East," Mr. Obama
said.

"Well, my strategy is pretty straightforward, which is to go after the bad guys,
to make sure we do our very best to interrupt them, to kill them, to take them
out of the picture," Mr. Romney replied.

Mr. Obama chided him for having once described Russia as the nation's greatest
threat abroad. Mr. Romney said that he had called Russia a geo-strategic threat,
a distinction he said from the national security threat posed by Iran.

"Governor, when it comes to foreign policy, you seem to want to import the
foreign policies of the 1980s, just like the social policies of the 1950s, and
the economic policies of the 1920s," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Romney repeatedly said he would do a better job of projecting strength
abroad, but he seemed to take pains to escape an image of Cold War truculence,
emphasizing several times his determination to avoid armed conflicts.

On Iran he said he would have imposed tougher sanctions sooner than the
administration but he did not specify what new steps he would take to deter Iran
from pursuit of nuclear capability. He dismissed the president's criticism
saying, "Attacking me is not an agenda."

Mr. Romney said he would strengthen the military, complaining that the Navy had
fewer ships than at anytime since 1917, and the Air Force fewer planes than it
had after World War II.

Mr. Obama acknowledged that there were fewer ships, but said that was because
modern warfare makes more use of submarines and aircraft carriers. He noted
sarcastically that it was also true that the military had fewer horses and
bayonets than it did in the World War I era.

In another exchange, Mr. Romney returned to the charge proclaimed in the title
to his campaign book, "No Apology."

"Mr. President, the reason I call it an apology tour is because you went to the
Middle East and you flew to Egypt and Saudi Arabia, and to Turkey and Iraq," he
said. "And by the way, you skipped Israel, our closets friend in the region, but
you went to the other nations."

Mr. Obama noted that he had visited Israel as a candidate -- "And when I went to
Israel as a candidate, I didn't take donors. I didn't attend fundraisers," he
said, referring to the campaign activity that accompanied Mr. Romney's summer
visit to Israel.

Mr. Romney repeatedly pivoted from foreign affairs to the domestic economy,
taking any chance to criticize his opponent on the pace of the recovery.

Mr. Obama turned to the domestic scene himself late in the debate as he cited
his familiar criticism of Mr. Romney's opposition to a bailout of the auto
industry, criticism that Mr. Romney insisted was inaccurate in one of many
exchanges that reprised issues from their previous two debates.

The goals for the two candidates were clear before they took the Lynn University
stage. Mr. Romney was intent on characterizing the president as a weak leader
who had invited challenges abroad and failed to adequately support U.S. allies,
such as Israel. Mr. Obama sought to drive home the point that Mr. Romney was not
a plausible commander-in-chief, that his positions on issues from Libya to Iran
had repeatedly shifted, united only in their utility as cudgels against the
administration.

The exchanges sparked by moderator Schieffer marked the last joint appearance of
the candidates with two weeks to go in a race that appeared to remain
neck-and-neck nationally and in the key swing states expected to determine the
electoral vote winner. But going into the evening, whatever polling momentum
that did exist was on Mr. Romney's side.

The was a distinct contrast to the pre-debate environment, filled with accounts
of a foundering Romney campaign, reeling from the release of the "47 percent''
videotape -- recorded only a few miles from the debate site -- with Mr. Romney's
derisive characterization of half of the electorate. The Republican also
stumbled with his hasty criticism in the immediate aftermath of the Benghazi
attack that the debate revisited Monday night.

Then came Denver. Their first debate produced no memorable zingers from either
candidate, nor any major gaffes or mistakes. But Mr. Romney's strong performance
alongside a showing that even Mr. Obama acknowledged as listless shook up
perceptions of the race, and moved Mr. Romney into contention nationally, and
into leads or striking distance in one key state after another.

The president managed a more vigorous performance in last week's town hall
encounter in New York. Mr. Romney continued his aggressive criticism of Mr.
Obama on the economy, but once again failed in an attempt to score points off
the Benghazi attack. He insisted that Mr. Obama had failed to call the attack an
act of terrorism in his initial accounts, when, as moderator Candy Crowley noted
at the time, Mr. Obama had in fact used that term in his first Rose Garden
statement responding to it. Mr. Romney appeared to let that disagreement rest
Monday night.

Patrolling the debate spin room immediately afterword, Jen Psaki, Mr. Obama's
campaign press secretary, predicted that voters would see Mr. Romney as having
failed to present himself as a potential commander-in-chief. Eric Fehrnstrom,
Mr. Romney's communications strategist, insisted that it was Mr. Romney who
appeared more presidential. He acknowledged that Mr. Obama was the night's more
frequent aggressor and contended that that was because he "came in with the
agenda of a candidate who is falling behind."

It will take some time to get a sense of whether the debate reactions will move
numbers in any lasting way in this tight race. A George Washington
University/Politico survey released earlier Monday was one of several that
showed that Mr. Obama went into the night with an advantage on foreign policy.
Likely voters in 10 swing states said they trusted him over Mr. Romney on
foreign policy by a margin of 51-42 percent. The bad news for Mr. Obama in that
context is that voters this year have consistently ranked foreign policy low on
their list of priorities, far behind jobs and the economy as issues likely to
determine their votes. The same survey found Mr. Romney with an overall lead of
49 percent to 47 percent in those battlegrounds. Mr. Romney enjoys razor thin
leads in the compilations of polling averages maintained by RealClearPolitics
and pollster.com. The persistently narrow competition is underscored by the
results some of the recent components of those averages. Among either national
surveys released since the beginning of the weekend, Mr. Romney led in three,
Mr. Obama in another three, and in two more, they were tied.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Politics Editor James O'Toole: jotoole@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1562./

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Win McNamee/Associated Press: Republican presidential candidate
Mitt Romney and President Barack Obama answer a question from moderator Bob
Schieffer during the third presidential debate Monday at Lynn University in Boca
Raton, Fla.
PHOTO: Jewel Samad/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images: First Lady Michelle Obama,
left, hugs President Barack Obama as Ann Romney, right, hugs Republican
presidential candidate Mitt Romney at the end of the third and final
presidential debate Monday at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla.
PHOTO: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/Associated Press Moderator Bob Schieffer,
center, watches as the candidates shake hands before the start of the debate.
(Photo, Region Edition)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
