
                              12 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Tactics set, Obama, Romney hurtle toward finish

BYLINE: By Charles Babington And Thomas Beaumont

SECTION: NEWS; National; World; Local

LENGTH: 1379 words


BC-US--Presidential Campaign-State of Play, 2nd Ld-Writethru,1296

Tactics set, Obama, Romney hurtle toward finish

AP Photo FLEV101, DCPM102, GFX756

Eds: Links graphic. With AP Graphic. With AP Photos.

By CHARLES BABINGTON and THOMAS BEAUMONT

Associated Press

NORFOLK, Va. » With one debate and one jobs report to go, President Barack Obama
and Republican Mitt Romney are hurtling towards Election Day in a virtual
deadlock, each convinced that victory is within reach if his campaign sticks
with its plan.

In 16 days, voters will prove one of them wrong.

When that happens, the losing team will have years to ponder whether one final
tweak in tactics or message might have turned a fiercely fought, sometimes
joyless election that seems likely to rank among the nation's closest.

Having steadied himself after a damaging first debate, Obama is banking on his
renowned get-out-the-vote ground operation to steer millions of supporters to
the polls. Many have already voted, under early balloting scenarios that favor
campaigns with the most volunteers to flush out potential supporters.

Republicans, meanwhile, feel Romney has finally broken through with his message
that the economy can be much better, and that he's the man to prove it. He
pounded that theme in last week's second debate, sounding almost like a romance
counselor in imploring Americans not "to settle" for a less robust economy than
they deserve.

Interviews with top strategists indicate that neither campaign feels it needs to
make a significant shift in strategy in the closing days. Obama may hold a
slight edge in battleground states, some Republicans grudgingly say, but Romney
has the time, money and message to erase it.

"Republicans are coalescing around a candidate who has bridged the credibility
gap, and now the question is, can we make our closing arguments and win on the
ground," said veteran GOP strategist Terry Holt. "We're not there yet. But
that's where we're getting to."

Two scheduled events before Nov. 6 could wrinkle the race's fabric, although
millions of Americans have already voted or firmly made up their minds.

Obama and Romney meet Monday for their final debate, focused on foreign policy.
It's a topic that generally favors an incumbent president. But the forum comes
as Obama faces growing heat over the administration's handling of a deadly
confrontation at a U.S. consulate in Libya.

Romney stumbled last week when he tried to press that point. He will be under
pressure to deliver a sharper, more precise indictment Monday.

The economy remains the top issue, but to make his closing pitch to voters,
Romney "needs to look strong and presidential in a national security setting,"
said Steve Schmidt, who managed Republican John McCain's 2008 campaign.

And on Nov. 2 -- less than 100 hours before Election Day -- the government will
release its monthly unemployment report, for October. It's doubtful that
anything short of a huge rise or fall in the rate would change many votes'
minds. But in a neck-and-neck election, almost any event might be viewed as
crucial.

Republicans remain buoyed by what they see as the substantial and long-lasting
boost Romney received from his strong showing in the first debate, on Oct. 3,
when the president seemed listless.

Obama apparently stopped his slide with a vastly improved performance in the
second forum, two weeks later. But even the most partisan Democrats don't say he
completely undid the damage from Oct. 3.

Pollsters and strategists in both parties say the two debates essentially
returned the contest to its mid-August status, before Obama enjoyed a bounce
from the late-summer nominating conventions.

Romney now is focused on the two-step strategy every challenger must pursue:
Obama deserves to be fired, he says, and he, Romney, is a qualified alternative.

It's the essence of Romney's argument from the start. His campaign hopes the
noise from flubs -- such as Romney's criticism of the 47 percent of Americans
who pay no income tax -- has subsided to the point that voters are ready to tune
in.

The race "is definitely going in the right direction," Romney's running mate,
Paul Ryan, told a Florida radio show Friday. "It's going to come down to
turnout, voter enthusiasm."

Despite such optimism, the Electoral College map remains in Obama's favor. He
carried more states than he needed in 2008, so he can lose several of them next
month and still win a second term.

Romney's path is much narrower. He must take away at least a half-dozen states
from Obama. And they can't be just the small ones like Iowa and New Hampshire.

Florida is an absolute must for Romney. Ohio is the next closest thing.
Democrats see Ohio, with its lower-than-average unemployment rate and general
embrace of the president's auto industry bailout, as their best chance to stop
Romney cold.

Rather than pour their heaviest efforts into Florida and risk losing it by a
hair, the Obama campaign has placed its heaviest bet on Ohio. That has forced
Romney and Ryan to make their own stand there.

The two Republicans spent six of eight days in Ohio after the first debate.
Obama has made repeated visits.

More advertising money was being spent in Ohio last week, almost $9 million,
than any other state including Florida, where ad time is expensive. The
campaigns were spending a combined $7.3 million in Florida last week.

When Democrats are asked about polls that seem to show a pro-Romney drift, they
quickly change the subject to Obama's voter-turnout operation.

Some of the Obama campaign's paid workers never left key states after the 2008
election. They have spent four years building files of likely volunteers,
supporters and persuadable voters. It's a labor-intensive effort they say Romney
cannot match.

Jeremy Bird, Obama's national field director, released a memo Friday about early
voting in Ohio. The campaign has 125 field offices "in every corner of the
state," Bird wrote. "We are ahead of where we were at this time against John
McCain -- and ahead of Mitt Romney."

There's anecdotal evidence of strong early voting for Obama in Ohio, Florida,
North Carolina and elsewhere, but it's possible that Romney is roughly keeping
pace. In Florida, Democrats have cut into the GOP's traditional advantage in
absentee balloting. But Romney officials dismiss the numbers.

Many absentee-voting Democrats otherwise would have engaged in another practice,
simply called "early voting," which Democrats traditionally have dominated, GOP
officials say. They contend there's no net gain for the president.

In Colorado, another battleground state, Romney's ground game "is equal to, if
not superior to, the Obama ground game," said Dick Wadhams, a former state
Republican Party chairman.

Wadhams said he thinks Colorado suburban women, in particular, are edging
towards Romney, reassured by his solid performance in the first debate and his
vow to generate more jobs.

Obama, meanwhile, focused his campaign almost entirely on women after last
Tuesday's debate, in which Romney spoke awkwardly of receiving "binders full of
women" seeking top jobs when he was Massachusetts governor.

Campaigning Friday in northern Virginia, Obama told a heavily female audience
that when it comes to issues important to women's health and jobs, his opponent
has developed "Romnesia." The president was flanked by signs saying "Women's
Health Security."

Romney's jobs-and-economy pitch grew slightly more difficult at the week's end,
when nearly all the battleground states reported drops in their unemployment
rates. Most were modest, however.

In all-important Ohio, the unemployment rate dropped even though the total
number of jobs also fell, due to people retiring or leaving the workforce for
other reasons.

GOP strategists say the overall economy remains bleak enough for Romney to make
a forceful closing argument: Obama has failed to bring the jobs he promised, and
Romney has the skills and philosophy to do better.

"It remains jobs and the economy, and related fiscal issues, which people remain
unhappy about," said veteran Republican consultant Charlie Black. "And people
believe Romney is up to the task."

Obama volunteers hope to steer enough voters to the polls to overcome the GOP
message.

------

Babington reported from Washington. Alt Heads:

Tactics set, Obama, Romney hurtle toward finish

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Republican presidential candidate, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney, center, talks with foreign policy adviser Dan Senor, left, and his vice
presidential running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., before boarding his campaign
plane at Daytona International Airport, Saturday, Oct. 20, 2012, in Daytona
Beach, Fla. (AP Photo/ Evan Vucci)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
