
                              13 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday

Battle narrows to 9 states as Romney gains ground

BYLINE: JIM RUTENBERG and JEFF ZELENY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: BOCA RATON, Florida


With a last aggressive debate performance behind him and 13 grueling days ahead,
President Barack Obama is now facing what he worked so hard to avoid: a
neck-and-neck race with a challenger gaining ground when it matters most.

Over the past month, through the debates and a gradual moderation of the
conservative tone he struck during the Republican primaries, Mitt Romney
undermined the Democrats' expensive summertime work of casting him as the
candidate of and for the rich, emerging as a far more formidable opponent than
Mr. Obama had ever expected.

He continued down the path of moderation here in the debate on Monday, agreeing
with Mr. Obama almost as often as he disagreed.

Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, who credited Mr. Romney's strength
in the first debate as a critical shift in the campaign, said: ''For the first
time in this race, I'd rather be us than them. They spent months building him up
as one thing and in one night he disproved it.''

The president, aware of deepening worry among Democrats about the prospect of
losing the White House, was aggressive at the debate, belittling his rival's
foreign policy experience in a bid to keep voters from seeing him as a credible
commander in chief.

But Democrats could only hope the candidates' final encounter here would level
out a steady rise for Mr. Romney that has brought him to even with or leading
the president in several national polls of likely voters. The race is suddenly
so tight in the nine battleground states that each side is looking at a single
Maine congressional district whose one electoral vote, in the event of an
exceedingly tight outcome, could decide who occupies the White House after
Inauguration Day, Jan. 20.

The candidates on Tuesday began a last, intense assault on some of those
battleground states - spread across the United States - marrying repeated
personal appearances with final barrages of advertising in a grueling push to
fire up supporters and appeal to an ever-shrinking pool of undecided voters.

Underlying that push is the race to win the 270 electoral votes needed for
election. More than 40 states are solidly behind one candidate or the other, so
the two campaigns are now focusing intently on the few others that remain truly
close.

Mr. Obama reprised some of his debate themes on Tuesday before a rally of 11,000
supporters in Delray Beach, Florida. He then planned a brutal, almost-nonstop
blitz of six states on Wednesday and Thursday: Iowa, Colorado, Nevada, Florida
(again), Virginia and Ohio.

In the rally on Tuesday, Mr. Obama held up a copy of a new brochure his campaign
plans to distribute in battleground states (http://barackobama.com/plans).
''Compare my plan to Governor Romney's,'' Mr. Obama said, adding that his own
math ''adds up.'' The booklet is a response to Mr. Romney's criticism that the
president has no agenda for a second term.

Mr. Romney also faced an intense schedule. He held rallies on Tuesday in Nevada
and Colorado, and is to land in Iowa on Wednesday, just hours after the
president's departure.

His campaign also released a new ad attacking what it has called Mr. Obama's
''apology tour'' of foreign capitals in 2009. Mr. Obama denies having apologized
for U.S. actions or policies, a point he made forcefully in the debate Monday.

Before the debate, the growing sense of optimism inside the Romney campaign was
visible in the newly relaxed faces of its senior advisers as they lounged
poolside at a Delray Beach hotel and ticked through states where they saw new
opportunities. Back in Boston, a senior aide marveled at how much the mood had
changed in a month, gallows humor giving way to a realization that ''we're in
it.''

It remained a question whether Mr. Romney was gaining steam or riding a head of
it from the strongest month of his campaign. Obama officials argued that the
president's debate showing on Monday would remind wavering voters of his
leadership in foreign affairs. They insisted that he holds advantages in enough
swing states to provide a lifeline.

''This race has automatically tightened, as everybody in the Obama campaign
predicted that it would, but he's ahead in the critical states,'' said Senator
John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and Mr. Obama's debate sparring partner.

It is now unmistakable, however, that Mr. Obama is focused on protecting some of
his safest turf while Mr. Romney sees new opportunities to take it.

Though polls are mixed, Mr. Romney appears to be on an upward trajectory, either
overtaking Mr. Obama or at least cutting into his leads.

A CBS News poll released on Monday showed that Mr. Obama's edge among women was
down to 5 percentage points from 12 a month ago. Another, from CBS News and
Quinnipiac University, showed Mr. Obama's lead in Ohio among likely voters
narrowing to 5 percentage points from 10 points last month.

Mr. Obama will spend the time remaining before the Nov. 6 election pitting the
campaign machinery he built to push his voters to the polls against Mr. Romney's
sense of momentum and progress in states that had been tilting away from him.

Yet Mr. Romney still faces more of a challenge in the Electoral College; four
years ago, Mr. Obama won all the battleground states.

Romney aides, acknowledging the challenge, hope to break through Mr. Obama's
firewall of supportive states while seeking new opportunities in places once
thought out of reach, like New Hampshire and Nevada.

Mr. Romney and Mr. Obama now have contrasting imperatives. Mr. Romney is seeking
to win over the last remaining undecided voters - many of them 2008 Obama
supporters - by presenting himself as a credible president ready to work in the
bipartisan manner swing voters crave. Mr. Obama has to keep that from happening.

That gives Mr. Romney an opening to show himself as the transcendent politician
of a sort Mr. Obama has sought to be, even as Mr. Obama pounds away at him in
commercials.

The question for Mr. Obama is whether the renewed attacks the president's camp
plans on Mr. Romney's business record can still work. Aides to Mr. Romney argue
that Mr. Obama and his allies ran so many ads painting Mr. Romney as an uncaring
plutocrat that they turned him into a caricature. It was shattered when he
showed up as someone else - himself, they say - on the debate stage.

''He wiped out millions of dollars in attack ads portraying Mitt Romney as a
rich guy from Bain Capital,'' said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona.

Democrats say they are confident about the continued power of their attacks
against Mr. Romney's past business practices, as well as on his secretly taped
remarks that 47 percent of Americans are so reliant on government they will not
take responsibility. Obama campaign officials credit that line of attack for the
president's continued edge in the Midwest.

The best path to victory for Mr. Romney is to win Florida, North Carolina,
Virginia, Ohio - and one more state, perhaps Colorado.

The narrowest path for Mr. Obama is winning Ohio, Wisconsin and at least one
other state, possibly Iowa.

As a sign of how tight the election could be, the president is heading to New
Hampshire on Saturday to avoid what one aide described as ''the Al Gore
problem.''

In 2000, Mr. Gore lost New Hampshire to George W. Bush, making the entire
presidential race hinge on Florida.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
