
                              14 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Altered Race as Republicans Recast Romney Image

BYLINE: By JIM RUTENBERG and JEFF ZELENY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1230 words


BOCA RATON, Fla. -- With a last aggressive debate performance behind him and 14
grueling days ahead, President Obama is now facing what he worked so hard to
avoid: a neck-and-neck race with a challenger gaining ground when it matters
most.

Over the last month, through the debates and a gradual moderation of the
conservative tone he struck during the Republican primaries, Mitt Romney
undermined the Democrats' expensive summertime work of casting him as the
candidate of and for the rich, emerging as a far more formidable opponent than
Mr. Obama had ever expected.

He continued down the path of moderation here on Monday night, agreeing with Mr.
Obama almost as often as he disagreed.

''For the first time in this race, I'd rather be us than them,'' said Senator
Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, crediting Mr. Romney's strength in the first
debate as a critical shift in the campaign. ''They spent months building him up
as one thing and one night he disproved it.''

The president, aware of deepening worry among Democrats about the prospect of
losing the White House, was aggressive at the debate, belittling his rival's
foreign policy experience in a bid to keep voters from seeing him as a credible
commander in chief.

But Democrats could only hope the candidates' final encounter here would level
out a steady rise for Mr. Romney that has brought him to even with or leading
the president in several national polls of likely voters. The race is suddenly
so tight in the nine battleground states that each side is looking at a single
Congressional district in Maine whose one electoral vote, in the event of an
exceedingly tight outcome, could decide whether Mr. Romney or Mr. Obama is in
the White House come Jan. 20.

The growing sense of optimism inside the Romney campaign about his place in the
race was visible in the newly relaxed faces of its senior advisers as they
lounged poolside at their hotel in nearby Delray Beach before Monday's debate,
ticking through states where they see new opportunities and rising poll numbers.
Back in Boston, a senior aide marveled at how much the mood had changed from one
month ago, gallows humor giving way to a realization that ''we're in it.''

It remained a question whether Mr. Romney was gaining steam or riding a head of
it from the strongest month of his campaign. Obama officials argued that the
president's showing at the debate on Monday would remind wavering voters of his
leadership in foreign affairs, a strong suit. They emphatically pointed to
advantages he still holds in enough important swing states as their life line.

''This race has automatically tightened as everybody in the Obama campaign
predicted that it would, but he's ahead in the critical states,'' said Senator
John Kerry of Massachusetts, Mr. Obama's debate sparring partner.

But it is now unmistakable that Mr. Obama, who leaned forward in his chair at
several points during the debate and glared at his rival, is focused on
protecting some of his safest turf and Mr. Romney is seeing new opportunities to
take it.

Though polls have shown a mix of results, it is more often than not Mr. Romney
who is on the upward trajectory, if not always overtaking Mr. Obama, then, at
least, cutting into his leads among important constituencies. For instance a CBS
News poll released Monday showed his edge among women was down to 5 percentage
points from 12 a month ago. Another, from CBS News and Quinnipiac University,
showed Mr. Obama's lead in Ohio among likely voters narrowing to 5 percentage
points from 10 points last month.

Mr. Obama will spend the next two weeks pitting the campaign machinery he built
to push his voters to the polls against Mr. Romney's sense of momentum and new
signs of hope in states that were tilting away from him only a month ago.

Yet Mr. Romney still faces more of a challenge in the Electoral College and must
win more of the battleground states than does Mr. Obama, who won all of them
four years ago.

Though they had been basking in their new sense of momentum, Mr. Romney's aides
acknowledged that their hardest work could still lie ahead. They were hoping to
break through Mr. Obama's firewall of supportive states while seeking new
opportunities in places previously believed to be slipping out of reach, like
New Hampshire and Nevada.

Underlying it all will be a defining fight, as Mr. Obama and his allies seek to
recreate the image of Mr. Romney as a plutocrat whose policies will punish the
middle class. Television ads from Democratic groups began appearing on Monday,
reprising the accusations that Mr. Romney killed jobs to make a profit at Bain
Capital.

Mr. Romney's aides say voters now know him well enough to reject that image.
They say they will continue to present Mr. Romney as a credible leader whose
plans have a specific appeal to women, who have provided Mr. Obama much of his
support in polls.

Heading into the final phase of their advertising war, Mr. Romney and Mr. Obama
have contrasting imperatives.

Mr. Romney is seeking to win over the last remaining undecided voters -- many of
them 2008 Obama supporters -- by presenting himself as a credible president
ready to work in the bipartisan manner swing voters crave. Mr. Obama has to keep
that from happening.

And that is making for a jarring contrast during the commercial breaks -- giving
Mr. Romney the opening to show himself as the transcendent politician of a sort
Mr. Obama has sought to be as Mr. Obama pounds away at him in his commercials.

The question for Mr. Obama is whether attacks on Mr. Romney's business record
can still work. Aides to Mr. Romney argue that Mr. Obama and his allies ran so
many ads painting Mr. Romney as plutocrat whose policies would harm the middle
class that they turned him into a caricature. It was shattered when he showed up
as someone else -- himself, they say -- on the debate stage.

''He wiped out millions of dollars in attack ads portraying Mitt Romney as a
rich guy from Bain Capital,'' Senator John McCain said.

Democrats say they are confident about the continued power of their attacks
against Mr. Romney based on his business practices at Bain Capital, as well as
on his secretly taped remarks that 47 percent of Americans are so reliant on
government they will not take responsibility for themselves.

''It's not that this line of questioning of his business record doesn't have
salience,'' said Bill Burton, a senior strategist with Priorities USA Action, a
''super PAC'' supporting Mr. Obama. ''It's just that as we get to the end of the
campaign folks need a reminder.''

And Obama campaign officials argue that the line of attack is precisely what is
behind his continued edge in polls in the Midwest.

The best path to victory for Mr. Romney is to win Florida, North Carolina,
Virginia, Ohio -- and one more state, with campaign advisers putting Colorado at
the top of the list.

The narrowest path to victory for Mr. Obama is by winning Ohio, Wisconsin and at
least one other state -- the president's personal top favorite, aides say, is
Iowa. Along with other safely Democratic states, that would be enough to block
Mr. Romney from winning.

As a sign of how tight the election could be, the president is heading to New
Hampshire on Saturday to avoid what one aide described as ''the Al Gore
problem.'' In 2000, Mr. Gore lost New Hampshire to George W. Bush, which made
the entire presidential race hinge on Florida.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/23/us/politics/campaign-moods-shift-as-contest-ti
ghtens.html

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A supporter listened to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. on
Monday at a rally in Canton, Ohio. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL F. McELROY FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
