
                              18 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday

US election: Obama puts on a positive spin after final debate victory: Negative
ads make way for second term planning Romney 'all over the map' on foreign
policy

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskill in Boca Raton

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 893 words


Barack Obama tried to seize back the political initiative yesterday by abruptly
switching to a new, positive strategy for the final stretch of the White House
campaign after dominating the third and final presidential debate.

After months of criticism for negative campaigning - with a costly stream of
advertisements attacking Republican candidate Mitt Romney's character - the
Obama campaign will now emphasise what the president would do with another four
years. With the debates behind them, Obama and Romney hit the campaign trail
yesterday, beginning a series of gruelling tours of the battlefield states that
will hold the key to the election on 6 November.

Obama spoke at a rally in Florida before heading to Ohio, while Romney held
events in Nevada and Colorado.

The consensus in the US media was that Obama had dominated Monday's 90-minute
debate on foreign policy in Boca Raton, Florida, but that it was not enough.
Although Obama won then - a CBS instant poll after the Boca Raton debate put him
on 53% to Romney's 23% - and last week, these victories have not compensated for
the president's lacklustre performance in Denver that allowed Romney back into
the election race.

Democrats and undecided voters have been pleading with Obama for months to set
out in detail his second-term agenda, on which he has been vague so far.

The campaign is printing 3.5m copies of a 20-page leaflet to be distributed in
the battlefield states setting out his proposals for economic recovery, domestic
energy, education, tax, healthcare and pensions.

Obama was backing it up with a minute-long advert in nine battlefield states
from today. Although it is an important strategic switch, there is little new in
the leaflet, merely repackaging plans outlined over the past few months.

The Romney campaign immediately dismissed the brochure, with one top aide
deriding it as a "glossy panic button".

In spite of the shift towards a more positive strategy, the Obama campaign will
not completely abandon its attacks on Romney's character.

At a rally in Delray Beach, Florida, yesterday morning the president continued
to attack his opponent, accusing him of being a serial flip-flopper.

"We are accustomed to seeing politicians change their position from four years
ago," Obama said. "We are not accustomed to seeing politicians change their
positions from four days ago."

Obama's main adviser, David Axelrod, in a conference call with reporters,
described the debate as "a great springboard for the last two weeks (of
campaigning)".

He denied rumours that the Obama campaign was abandoning North Carolina and
Florida as already lost, insisting the races in those key states remain tight.
"We'll know who's bluffing and who isn't in two weeks," Axelrod said.

Of the two campaigns, the Romney team seems to be the jauntier, apparently
hoping that the momentum that began in Denver will carry them through.

Stuart Stevens, one of Romney's main advisers, said: "We came in (to the Monday
debate) in a strong position and left in an even stronger one." He identified
Ohio as a pivotal battlefield state. "He will be in Ohio a lot," Stevens said.

Restore Our Future, one of the super-political action committees, has begun a
$17.7m ad blitz for Romney, whose campaign is continuing with negative adverts,
with one focusing on a line in the debate in which Romney accused Obama of
having gone on an "apology tour" of the Middle East early in his presidency -
something the president vociferously denied.

During the third debate, Obama repeatedly portrayed Romney as "all over the map"
on foreign policy. He described his opponent twice as "wrong and reckless".

The president worked through a list of issues on which he said Romney had been
wrong, from support for the 2003 Iraq invasion through to opposing a timetable
for withdrawal from Afghanistan.

But on many issues, from Iranian sanctions to withdrawal from Afghanistan, there
was little difference between Romney's position and the administration's, but
Romney insisted he would have projected US strength more effectively.

Continuing his shift into a more moderate, centrist position, he insisted that,
in spite of past bellicose statements, he was not looking to engage in another
war.

One of the most telling moments came when Obama, in a flash of arrogance,
lectured Romney on military developments. Responding to a pledge by Romney to
increase military spending and a complaint that the navy had fewer ships, Obama
resorted to heavy sarcasm.

"You mentioned the navy, for example, and that we have fewer ships than we did
in 1917. Well, governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the
nature of our military's changed," Obama said.

But Romney recovered in the second half of the debate. He said an attack on Iran
would be a last resort and he was against direct military involvement in Syria.
He sought to neutralise Obama's advantage from the killing of Osama bin Laden by
insisting that his own policy was about more than "going after the bad guys".
"We can't just kill our way out of this mess," Romney said.

Captions:

Debate over

Clockwise from left: Mitt Romney and his wife Ann greet members of the public;
Bob Schieffer, moderator of the third debate, watches the candidates; Michelle
Obama joins her husband; Richard and Carol Smith watch the debate in Boca Raton,
Florida Main photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
