
                              19 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                     The Telegraph-Journal (New Brunswick)

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

After Libya misfire, pressure on Romney

SECTION: CLASSIFIEDS; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 1087 words


WASHINGTON - When President Barack Obama and Mitt Romney face off on Monday in
their third and final debate, it will be the Republican challenger's last best
chance to recover from his botched "Libya moment" and exploit vulnerabilities in
his opponent's foreign policy record.

But Romney has an uphill struggle to make his case against Obama, who will be
buoyed by the advantages of incumbency as well as polls showing him with an edge
- though a shrinking one - on the question of who is more trusted in global
affairs.

This week's debate in Boca Raton, Florida, coming just 15 days before the
election and devoted entirely to foreign policy, could be the riskiest of the
three nationally televised showdowns for Romney, largely because of his
inexperience and recent blunders on the world stage.

Romney's missteps in criticizing Obama's handling of a deadly September attack
on the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi - the focus of a vividly testy
exchange in the previous debate - have complicated his broader strategy of
trying to cast the president as a weak steward of American power abroad.

Deprived of one of his most potent lines of attack, expect Romney to instead
focus more of his criticism on Obama's policies toward Iran, Israel, Syria,
China, Afghanistan and Russia.

"Obama has a record, and Romney doesn't, so he can just cherry-pick the
arguments," said Jon Alterman, a former State Department policy planner now at
the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank in Washington.
"But that doesn't mean any of it will stick."

Romney's aides hope that chipping away at Obama's credibility on foreign policy
and national security - areas the White House once saw as largely immune from
Republican attack - can help put him over the top with undecided voters in the
final weeks of a White House race still too close to call.

WILL VOTERS CARE?

Obama's policies have faced setbacks recently, from challenges to U.S. interests
in the Middle East to a string of attacks on U.S.-led NATO forces in Afghanistan
by the Afghan troops they are supposed to be training.

A report in The New York Times that the Obama administration has agreed in
principle with Iran to hold one-on-one talks over Tehran's nuclear program could
provide a fresh avenue for Romney to cast Obama as too willing to accommodate.

Republican Senator Rob Portman, Romney's sparring partner in mock debates ahead
of Monday night, warned Obama against sidelining U.S. allies in the diplomatic
front against Iran.

"The other thing that gets interesting about the story, if it's accurate, it
sounds like the U.S. is taking a position that we're likely to jettison our
allies," he told NBC's Meet the Press. "The last thing we would want to do is
abandon our allies on this and make it a one-on-one negotiation," he said.

It remains to be seen how much traction any of this will have with voters, whose
main concerns by far are the economy and jobs.

The problem for Romney is that in focusing on Obama's trouble spots, he also
further exposes his own weaknesses.

As former governor of Massachusetts and an ex-businessman, he is out of his
comfort zone when not focused on domestic and economic matters.

That was evident in last week's debate when he mistakenly said Obama took weeks
to acknowledge that the Benghazi assault - which claimed the lives of the U.S.
ambassador and three other Americans - was a terrorist attack.

Obama, who said he had done so in an appearance in the White House Rose Garden
the day after the attack, challenged Romney to "check the transcript" and
chastised him for trying to score political points from a national tragedy.

A slew of pundits dubbed it Romney's "Libya moment," and some of his own aides
conceded privately that Obama got the better of him.

On top of that, Obama managed to shift the focus away from the thornier question
of whether the administration had ignored requests to beef up diplomatic
security in Libya.

Romney went silent on Libya after Tuesday's encounter but aides say the
Republican, hunkered down in debate prep in Florida this weekend, will be ready
to deal with it on Monday night when it is all but certain to come up again.

What Romney hopes to do is press his point, drowned out in the last debate, that
the recent wave of anti-American violence in Libya and other parts of the Middle
East shows Obama's foreign policy is "unravelling before our very eyes."

At the same time, he will want to avoid giving Obama another opportunity to go
on the offensive.

"I doubt the governor will end up parsing words. That's not the most productive
thing to do," said Eliot Cohen, a Romney adviser and neoconservative foreign
policy expert at the Johns Hopkins School of International Studies in
Washington.

Romney must also show voters he has what it takes to be a capable
commander-in-chief, and he will seek to counter any attempt by Obama to "paint
him as an insane warmonger," Cohen said.

Obama - who has touted the U.S. withdrawal from Iraq as a signature foreign
policy accomplishment - has signalled he could use the debate to caution
war-weary voters of the risk of a more hawkish Romney presidency.

At a campaign rally in New Hampshire last week, Obama suggested Romney was
promoting the kind of foreign policy that "takes us into wars without a plan to
get us out."

A Pew Research Center survey, conducted after the first debate but before the
second, showed Obama ahead 47 per cent to 43 per cent on the question of who
would make wiser foreign policy decisions. That was much narrower than Obama's
15 percentage-point advantage in a poll early last month.

LOOKING FOR CONTRASTS

Romney will be under pressure to sharpen contrasts with Obama when the two men
sit side-by-side across the table from moderator Bob Schieffer, known for a
cantankerous demeanour with guests on the Sunday morning CBS news show Face the
Nation.

The 90-minute debate will be divided into six segments: America's role in the
world; the war in Afghanistan; Israel and Iran; the changing Middle East;
terrorism; and China's rise.

Critics have accused Romney of relying on generalities and platitudes - he has
hearkened back to Ronald Reagan's "peace through strength" doctrine - and he
could be put on the spot if he resists providing specifics.

Romney has promised to tighten the screws over Iran's nuclear program. He has
accused Obama of "leading from behind" as Syria's civil war expands, and of a
politically timed exit from the unpopular Afghanistan war.

But in each case, critics say, he has not detailed alternatives policies.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


      Copyright 2012 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest MediaWorks
                               Publications Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
