
                              21 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                          The Calgary Herald (Alberta)

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

Foreign policy takes mainstage; Obama, Romney go on offensive in last debate

BYLINE: William Marsden, Postmedia News

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 1456 words

DATELINE: BOCA RATON, FLA.


U.S. President Barack Obama and his Republican rival, Mitt Romney, went
head-to-head on foreign policy issues Monday night, with Romney accusing Obama
of failing to stem the resurgence of al-Qaida and of playing a weak hand in the
Arab Spring uprisings.

As has been his strategy throughout the campaign, he claimed Obama has been an
unreliable friend to his allies such as Israel, while his policies toward
America's enemies have been weak and apologetic.

"My strategy is straightforward: Go after the bad guys," he said. "We watch a
rising tide of chaos occur. We see al-Qaida rushing in."

Obama claimed Romney was proposing a more hawkish policy that could protract the
war in Afghanistan and get the U.S. into wars in Syria and Iran.

He said Romney "has proposed wrong and reckless policies" similar to those of
former U.S. president George W. Bush.

He defended his record noting he ended the Bush war in Iraq, is pulling out of
Afghanistan in 2014 and has imposed sanctions on Iran for its nuclear program
that are the harshest in the history of American foreign policy.

Obama targeted Romney's lack of experience in foreign affairs, noting that his
foreign venture this year ended in embarrassment when he insulted Britain by
saying it wasn't ready to hold the Olympics.

He said Romney has been "all over the map" in his foreign policy, one day saying
Russia is America's greatest enemy then saying it's al-Qaida.

"I know you haven't been in a position to actually execute foreign policy," he
said. "What we need is a strong, consistent foreign policy."

Romney replied: "Attacking me is not an agenda."

He accused Obama of going on "an apology tour" of the Middle East when he first
took office during which he claimed he told Arab countries that America had been
derisive and dismissive of many countries and had dictated to many countries.

Obama replied that the allegation that he had apologized for America is the
"biggest whopper said in this campaign."

Despite the foreign policy theme of this debate, both candidates frequently
wandered into the domestic issues that most Americans say are the most
important, such as the economy and education.

Both men said that to maintain America's strength it is vital to have a strong
economy and improved education system. But Romney blamed Obama for the high
level of unemployment and Obama said Romney's plan to cut taxes by $5 trillion
and add another $2 trillion to the military budget would only plunge the nation
into greater debt.

"The math doesn't work," he said.

Both candidates rejected the idea that American should abandon Pakistan.

Romney said, "It is not time to divorce a nation that has 100 nuclear weapons"
and is a home to terrorism.

"This is a nation which, if it becomes a failed state, there are nuclear weapons
there and you have terrorists that can grab those nuclear weapons," he said.

He claimed that after four years of Obama "we have not seen the progress we need
to have" on the international stage. He said that Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan
and the Middle East are still major threats to world peace.

"There are always going to be elements within these countries that will be a
threat to the United States," he said. "But the truth is that al-Qaida does not
have the same capacity it had to attack the United States as it did four years
ago."

Obama claimed that along with international terrorism, China is one of the
greatest threats to America. He said Romney was not in a position to tackle
trade issues because he has invested in a company that deals in China.

Romney said the greatest national threat is a nuclear Iran. He said China wants
a stable world to grow its economy. But he criticized China for unfair trade
practices, currency manipulation and cyber attacks on America's secrets and
patents.

"We have to say to our friends in China, 'Look you guys are playing
aggressively, we understand that but this can't go on,'" he said.

Obama responded by reiterating that Romney is "familiar with jobs going overseas
because you invested in companies that sent jobs overseas."

While the debate format differed from last week's town-hall style, the tone did
not. Both candidates were unrelenting as they challenged each other on a host of
topics often speaking to each other directly as if they were arguing over the
dinner table.

This was the last of three presidential debates before the Nov. 6 election. It
was held at the small and little-known Lynn University, whose 2,100 students
come from 87 different countries and where one college T-shirt jokes, "We've
never heard of you, either."

Bob Schieffer, host of the CBS political roundtable Face the Nation, moderated
the debate, giving the candidates two minutes to respond to questions, followed
by 15 minutes of discussion. The main themes: America's role in the world, trade
with China, terrorism, the Middle East and southwest Asia.

Foreign policy issues are not normally considered vital issues in the
presidential race, but the polls are so close that almost any issue could have
an impact the outcome in the U.S. race.

The importance of this debate for the Republicans, whose nominee polls well
behind Obama on foreign policy issues, was underlined by the presence of Sen.
John McCain, who gave extensive interviews before the debate.

He criticized Obama for his "un-presidential" behaviour in last week's town-hall
format debate when the president was far more assertive and aggressive than he
had been during the first debate in Denver.

"I have never seen a president or a presidential candidate behave in the way
that he did," McCain said. "It's a sign of desperation but also not a lot of
class."

He said the foreign policy debate was about leadership. "It's about how the
president can answer for our failed leadership throughout the world. Look at our
relations with Russia, no progress with Iran on nuclear weapons, strained
relations with Israel, al-Qaida coming back strongly in Iraq, things
deteriorating in Afghanistan and of course the continued massacre of some 30,000
in Syria.

"And I think he has only spoken out for them once or tried to help them; they
are receiving Russian arms, Iranians (are) on the ground; murder, torture and
gang rape, which is unconscionable."

Asked if Obama shouldn't at least be given credit for killing Osama bin Laden,
McCain said, "I think all Americans give the president credit for the
elimination of Osama bin Laden, and then he should take credit for the abject
failure throughout the Middle East. Al-Qaida is on the return."

Turning to China, McCain, a former Republican presidential candidate who lost to
Obama in 2008, accused the Chinese of waging cyber-attacks on American secrets
and not being a "mature" country.

"The American people are very unhappy about some of the things that the Chinese
have been doing and they have failed to mature as they have become a world
economic power," he said. "The cyber-attacks that have been committed against
the United States are unacceptable.

"Some of our most sensitive information has been hacked into by the Chinese
government. So that has to come to a stop. The South China Sea is an area of
great tension and the Chinese have to act in a much more mature fashion and it
might be nice to see some beginnings of democracy in China as well."

Criticizing Romney for claiming Obama has not given its foreign diplomats
sufficient security, Melanie Roussell, Democratic National Committee press
secretary, said before the debate that "you cannot say on the one hand that we
should have more security and then have the Republican Congress, the party of
which you are the leader, cutting that budget every opportunity they get."

She added that "Romney has made every attempt to politicize what has happened in
Benghazi before we knew the details of what happened."

Romney, she said, promised in the video in which he said 47 per cent of
Americans considered themselves victims "that he would consider the opportunity
if presented to take political advantage of an international incident and that
is what he has done with this Benghazi attack."

She said Obama "has made this country safer, more secure and stronger in the
last four years. He has decimated al-Qaida, eliminated Osama bin Laden, ended
the war in Iraq, he's bringing the war in Afghanistan to a close in 2014, and
realigned ourselves with our allies, provided the harshest sanctions against
Iran in our history - crumbling their economic structure."

Romney also accused Obama of failing to stop or even slow down Iran's nuclear
program. Romney has not suggested anything that he would do differently in Iran,
Roussell said. "And the only thing left to do is go to war. So if Mitt Romney
wants to go to war, the American people deserve to know that and he should tell
us tonight."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Joe Raedle, Getty Images; U.S. President Barack Obama, right, debates
with Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney as moderator Bob Schieffer,
centre, of CBS looks on at the Keith C. and Elaine Johnson Wold Performing Arts
Center at Lynn University on Monday night in Boca Raton, Florida.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 The Calgary Herald, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication
                                      Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
