
                              22 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday

Obama bags it as foreign policies hit home

BYLINE: LARA MARLOWE, in Delray Beach Florida

SECTION: WORLD; US Presidential Election; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 999 words


THE QUEUE stretched farther than I could see; some 11,000 Americans waited
good-naturedly to see President Barack Obama in a tennis stadium yesterday
morning. Under blue sky, with palm trees quivering above the stars and stripes,
they chanted  Four more years. Four more years .

Obama s victory in the foreign policy debate, down the road in Boca Raton, had
given them a boost. For half an hour in Delray Beach, hope lived again.

Somehow, Mitt Romney s rallies never attain the warm and fuzzy brotherhood thing
Obama does so well. With post debate polls giving Obama a victory ranging from
eight to 16 percentage points, the president was in top form. True, it was
nothing like the 45 per cent lead Romney scored on his October 3rd debate
performance. If Obama loses 12 days from now, history will trace his defeat back
to Denver.

Obama s at his best when he wields humour. Google reported a rush on the word
bayonets  on Monday night, after the president mocked Romney s desire to spend
an extra $2 trillion on defence that the military haven t even asked for . The
US navy is smaller than it s been since 1917; the air force at its most
ill-equipped since 1947, Romney moaned.

I think Governor Romney maybe hasn t spent enough time looking at how our
military works,  Obama said.

You mentioned the navy, for example, that we have fewer ships than we did in
1916. Well, governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets.  Laughter erupted
in the press room.

At yesterday s rally, Obama revisited the debate, using a new term he s coined
to describe Romney s shifting policies.

Romney s foreign policy  has been wrong and reckless , Obama said.  Last night,
he was all over the map . . . During the debate he said he didn t want more
troops in Iraq, but he was caught on video saying it was unthinkable not to
leave 20,000 troops in Iraq . . . Last night, he claimed to support my plan to
end the war in Afghanistan. I m glad he supports it. But he s opposed a timeline
that would actually bring our troops home.  At the debate, Romney said he always
supported killing Osama bin Laden.  But in 2007, he said it wasn t worth moving
heaven and earth to catch one man,  Obama reminded the crowd.  Now we ve come up
with a name for this condition: It s called Romnesia.

By now, anyone following the campaign has heard of  Romnesia . The crowd
nonetheless roared with laughter.  Romnesia! Romnesia! Romnesia!  they chanted.
We had a severe outbreak last night,  Obama continued.  It was at least stage
three Romnesia.

Over the past three weeks, Romney has bolted for the centre: in domestic
policies on October 3rd and in foreign policy on Monday night. Seeking to
reassure voters who fear he would drag the US into another war, Romney talked
mostly of peace. His most memorable line:  We can t kill our way out of this
mess  in the Middle East.

Yesterday, Obama pivoted to domestic issues, mocking Romney s  Romnesia  on the
auto bailout, the hiring of teachers and the saving of Medicare. Romnesia means
you can t seem to remember the policies on your website, or the promises that
you ve been making over the six years that you ve been running for president,
he said.

Don t worry, Obamacare covers pre-existing conditions. We can fix you up. We can
cure this disease!  Many of the supporters in the Delray stadium were true
believers. African American Natalie King (33), a customer services
representative for a local newspaper in Boca Raton, said proudly:  I volunteered
for the Obama campaign. I m a phone bank captain.  She brought her 93-year-old
mother to the rally, and refuses to believe polls that give Romney a slight edge
in Florida. I mentioned seeing plenty of Romney signs, but no Obama signs.
Everything the Romney campaign does is dirty and nasty,  King says.  They re
stealing Obama signs. We don t steal theirs.

Catherine Belle (68) wore an Obama T-shirt, an Obama watch, three Obama
bracelets and dangly Obama ear-rings. Belle, who is also African American,
boasted that her nephew in Tallahassee is often mistaken for Obama. A retired
school bus attendant for special needs children, Belle travelled to Washington
for the inauguration in 2009.

He stands for women and healthcare and all of us,  she says.  I don t like the
things that Romney stands for; from what I understand, he stands for the rich.
Because she is Jewish, Sheri Jacobs (46) is concerned that Obama has not visited
Israel. But she ll vote for him anyway, because  I think he needs more of a
chance. Nobody could solve these problems in four years.

The  Romnesia  angle appears to have swayed Jacobs and her husband Jack (60)
with whom she shares a catering business.

Sheri Jacobs is a registered Independent and considered voting Romney  but he
never stayed the same. He s a moderate when he s with moderates, and something
else when he s not. If the Republicans had a truly moderate candidate, I d have
voted for him.

If Obama can convince people like Jack Jacobs, he should win 12 days from now.
Jacobs is afraid Romney would take the US back to the Bush years, which  did not
benefit the middle class and upper middle class   people like us   only the
rich.  After the first debate, Jacobs leaned towards Romney. Now he s leaning
back towards Obama.

It seemed like Romney s tail was tucked between his legs  in the foreign policy
debate, Jacobs says.  Romney changes his mind every other week. I don t like
that, and I don t like his stand on women s rights either.

Unlike the Romney event I attended last week, no one left the Obama rally before
it ended. Instead, supporters stood in the bleachers, cheering their candidate
as he plunged into the crowd. Bruce Springsteen s We Take Care of Our Own blared
from the loudspeakers, and many in the audience sang along. I thought of Obama s
tardy appropriation of the term  Obamacare , which the Republicans meant to be
derogatory.  I do care,  Obama says now. If Mitt Romney loses the election, it
will be because he couldn t convince Americans that he cared too.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved
