
                              23 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

Debate battle strayed from foreign policy

BYLINE: Janel Davis; Staff

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 1243 words


President Barack Obama and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney wrapped up the
presidential debate season Monday with a showdown in Florida. The topic: foreign
policy.

PolitiFact and PolitiFact Georgia are checking statements made by the
challengers, who have less than two weeks until Election Day.

We will be updating our online site --- www.politifact.com/georgia/ ---
throughout the day as more fact checks are completed. Readers can comment on our
Truth-O-Meter rulings at: www.facebook.com/politifact.georgia?fref=ts. They can
follow us on Twitter at PolitiFactGA.

Below are abbreviated versions of fact checks on statements by the candidates
during the third debate. Look for the complete fact checks at the PolitiFact
online sites.

President Barack Obama: "Veterans' unemployment is actually now lower than (the)
general population. It was higher when I came into office."

Obama used this claim Monday night to show that he has worked to successfully
get unemployed veterans back to work.

We wondered whether Obama had his statistics correct.

We looked at data compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We focused on two
categories --- all veterans and those who specifically served in the post-Sept.
11, 2011, armed forces.

Unemployment for all veterans was lower than the general population in January
2009 and remained so in September 2012, at 7.4 percent and 6.7 percent,
respectively. Obama had said veteran unemployment was higher than the
unemployment rate for the general population when he came into office. In
January 2009, general unemployment was 7.8 percent, so by this measurement, he's
wrong.

Whether you're talking about all veterans or just those who served after 9/11,
Obama gets one number right but one number wrong.

We rated his claim Half True.

Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney: "I went to the Olympics that was out of
balance, and we got it on balance."

Romney reminded viewers about his role in the 2002 Winter Olympics once again
during Monday's debate. He left Bain Capital in early 1999 and took the helm of
the Salt Lake Organizing Committee in the aftermath of a bribery scandal.

"I'm pleased that I've balanced budgets," he said. "I was in the world of
business for 25 years. If you didn't balance your budget, you went out of
business. I went to the Olympics that was out of balance, and we got it on
balance and made a success there."

The Salt Lake City assignment launched Romney into the national spotlight and
helped reboot his political career, catapulting him to a successful 2002
gubernatorial campaign in Massachusetts.

The Games had two budgets. The privately run Salt Lake Organizing Committee used
money from sources such as television rights to fund the operational costs and
construction of needed sports venues. Under Romney's stewardship, the budget
ended up with a surplus.

A second pot of taxpayer dollars paid for transportation upgrades and security
costs. Romney is talking about the first budget that was indeed balanced under
his leadership. But that doesn't tell the whole story, since he helped secure at
least $400 million --- and possibly up to $1.5 billion --- in government funding
to subsidize the Olympics. That information is not included in the balance sheet
he touts.

Romney's statement was correct but could use additional clarification.

We rated Romney's claim Mostly True.

Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney: "The president said he was going to
create daylight between ourselves and Israel."

Romney made this claim during Monday night's debate to give credence to his
criticism that President Barack Obama doesn't hold the Jewish state in a tight
enough embrace.

The "daylight" comment stems from a July 15, 2012, story in The Washington Post
about a meeting Obama held in 2009 with several Jewish leaders. The meeting was
closed to the media, and there is no transcript of what was said. The Post story
was based on interviews with people in the meeting.

The relevant excerpt:

"If you want Israel to take risks, then its leaders must know that the United
States is right next to them," Malcolm Hoenlein, the executive vice chairman of
the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations, told the
president.

Obama politely but firmly disagreed.

"Look at the past eight years," he said, referring to the relationship the
George W. Bush administration had with Israel. "During those eight years, there
was no space between us and Israel, and what did we get from that? When there is
no daylight, Israel just sits on the sidelines, and that erodes our credibility
with the Arab states."

The White House does not confirm that Obama said those words.

That said, Romney is fairly characterizing a quote attributed to Obama, which
the White House has not denied.

We rated Romney's claim Mostly True.

President Barack Obama: Said former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney was clear
that he "would not provide government assistance to the U.S. auto companies,
even if they went through bankruptcy."

Both Romney and Obama strayed from foreign relations during Monday's debate with
several comments veering back to domestic affairs and the economy.

Obama repeated his claim that Romney would have let General Motors and Chrysler
fend for themselves as they went through bankruptcy.

In 2008, Romney wrote a now well-known New York Times op-ed called "Let Detroit
go bankrupt."

"The federal government should provide guarantees for post-bankruptcy financing
and assure car buyers that their warranties are not at risk," Romney wrote.

Romney's term "post-bankruptcy financing" can have two meanings. It can refer to
money used during bankruptcy and money used right afterward. The distinction has
great practical significance in this case, because without the loans in the
middle of a bankruptcy, there might be no automakers to lend to on the other
side.

We can't know for sure which meaning Romney had in mind. Obama, however, said
Romney would offer no government aid even if the carmakers went through
bankruptcy.

Romney's words were vague and quite limited in number, but he did speak of a
government guarantee, and that would be the case whether he meant for loans
during or after bankruptcy.

We rated Obama's statement Mostly False.

Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney: Under President Barack Obama,
middle-income American families have seen their incomes decline by $4,300 (a
year).

Romney repeated this claim during the debate to underscore his criticism of
Obama's failed economic policies. "The policies of the last four years have seen
incomes in America decline every year for middle-income families, now down
$4,300 during your term," Romney said. "Twenty-three million Americans still
struggling to find a good job."

The Romney campaign initially made a similar claim in an attack ad that under
Obama families "have lost over $4,000 a year in income."

That figure comes from a new but well-respected index created by Sentier
Research, which tracked a decline in the median family income from the month
Obama took office through June 2012. It's tricky to compare that data with
census data because they represent different time periods. But where it is
possible to compare Sentier with the census, the results are within a few
dollars of each other.

But the economy was on a downward track before Obama took office, and a
president has limited control over those forces.

Romney's ad cites trustworthy figures but oversimplifies the issue by assigning
blame to Obama.

We rated Romney's claim Half True.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspapers


                Copyright 2012 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
