
                              25 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

US election: Obama, Romney to spar over foreign policy

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 1073 words


Barack Obama and Republican rival Mitt Romney confront each other on foreign
policy Monday night in a third and final presidential debate, a must-win
televised face-off heading into the final two weeks of the deadlocked campaign
for the White House.

Polls show Obama with an advantage in voter perceptions about which candidate
would do best in foreign affairs, but Romney is expected to use the head-to-head
meeting in Boca Raton, Florida, to whittle away the president"s edge. He has
been hitting Obama hard on the administration"s uncertain explanations about
what happened in last month"s attack on the US Consulate in Benghazi, Libya.
Militants killed four Americans, including US Ambassador Chris Stevens.

Iran-Israel tensions, China, terrorism and the war in Afghanistan were all
subjects expected to come up in the 90-minute debate moderated by CBS News" Bob
Schieffer.

Against the background of the debate, 41 of the 50 US states are essentially
already decided, and the candidates now are fighting to win in the remaining
nine battleground states, including critical Ohio and Florida.

The battleground states assume outsized importance because the presidency is
decided in state-by-state contests, not by a national popular vote. The system
can, as it did in former Vice President Al Gore"s defeat in 2000, lead to a
candidate winning the popular vote but losing the presidency. George W. Bush
eked out a victory in the electoral college after the US Supreme Court stopped
the recount in Florida.

A new NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released Sunday showed Obama and Romney
tied, with both candidates backed by 47 per cent of likely voters nationwide.

The poll was conducted entirely in the aftermath of the second presidential
debate last Tuesday that Obama was perceived as winning following a poor
performance in the first debate on Oct. 3. In the last such poll before the
presidential debates began, the president held a narrow, three-point lead over
Romney, 49 per cent to 46 per cent.

But among the wider pool of all registered voters in the latest survey, Obama is
ahead of Romney by five points, 49 per cent to 44 per cent.

Looking at some of the most important demographic groups, Romney leads among men
(53 per cent to 43 per cent), Obama is up with women (51 per cent to 43 per
cent) and they are essentially tied among voters in the Midwest.

With early and absentee voting already under way in many swing states, including
Ohio, North Carolina and Iowa, the tight poll results indicate that the race
could be decided by which campaign is better able to lock in supporters and get
them to the polls.

Monday"s debate represents the candidates" last chance to directly confront one
another before an audience of millions of Americans watching the televised
face-off.

Obama spent the weekend with top aides preparing for the debate at Camp David,
the presidential retreat in Maryland"s Catoctin mountains. Romney did his pre-
debate work in Florida, continuing intensive preparations that have consumed
large amounts of his time in recent weeks.

In addition to the continuing political tussle over what happened in Libya,
reports flashed around Washington over the weekend about developments in the
administration"s efforts to end Iran"s suspected drive to build a nuclear
weapon. The White House denied a New York Times report that there was an
agreement in principle for bilateral talks with Tehran after the election. White
House National Security Council spokesman Tommy Vietor, however, said that the
Obama administration had repeatedly expressed its willingness for such talks.

Romney on Sunday refused to say if he would be open to one-on-one talks with
Iran if elected. He was asked about Iran while officiating a coin toss at a flag
football game on a Florida beach between reporters and his senior campaign
aides. Romney, who was taking a break from debate preparations, also declined to
say how he was feeling about the Monday debate or the new poll showing a close
race.

Iran"s economy is suffering mightily under a series of international sanctions
aimed at convincing the Islamic Republic to stop uranium enrichment, a precursor
to creating a nuclear weapon. Obama has said if diplomacy and sanctions fail, he
was ready to use military action. So has Romney, although he has said US threats
should be more robust.

Republicans accused Obama of leaking word of possible negotiations with Iran in
pursuit of political gain. Democrats shot back, arguing that Romney and his
party are the ones playing politics with national security.

Obama has ranked well with the public on his handling of international issues
and in fighting terrorism, especially after the daring US raid that killed Osama
bin Laden deep in Pakistan. But the administration"s response to the Libya
attack and questions over levels of security at the Benghazi consulate have
given Romney and his Republican allies an issue to question Obama"s foreign
policy leadership.

Heading into the campaign"s final two weeks, the economy and other domestic
issues remain the main focus of both candidates.

Romney has intensified criticism of Obama, claiming he has failed to tell
Americans what he would do with a second four-year term. Obama is fighting back
aggressively, insisting that Romney is hiding details of his much ballyhooed
plan to cut federal income tax rates across the board. Obama says Romney can"t
make all the tax cuts he has proposed without adding to the deficit or shifting
more of the tax burden from the wealthy to the middle class.

Romney also has vowed to repeal the president"s health care reforms, but Obama
says Romney has failed to say what he would do to replace the law which would
provide health insurance to 30 million Americans who now have no coverage.

The Obama campaign has also stressed that it"s hard to predict what Romney might
do as president, since he has changed his positions on many issues.

The president planned an extensive tour of battleground states after the debate,
with events in Florida and Ohio on Tuesday, including a joint event with Vice
President Joe Biden in Dayton, Ohio, before returning to the White House. Romney
and running mate Paul Ryan planned to campaign Tuesday in Colorado.

On Wednesday, Obama was packing his schedule with around-the-clock campaigning
in Davenport, Iowa; Denver; Los Angeles and Las Vegas, followed by events in
Tampa, Florida; Richmond, Virginia; Chicago and Cleveland on Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved
