
                              28 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

WORLD BEATER BAM Jabs foe on global flips Mitt tries to play it safe

BYLINE: BY CELESTE KATZ in Boca Raton, Fla. and JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY
NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1026 words


PRESIDENT OBAMA lacerated Mitt Romney Monday during their third and final debate
Monday, repeatedly painting his Republican rival as wrong, reckless and
inconsistent in world affairs.

Romney accused Obama of being ineffective on the global stage - but in a
surprise, he soft-pedaled several of his differences with Obama and even agreed
with the President on a host of policies.

In was, at times, a mirror image of their first debate nearly three weeks ago.
Obama was the aggressor Monday night, eager to draw distinctions; Romney seemed
content to make his points and run out the clock.

"Governor, the problem is that on a whole range of issues, whether it's the
Middle East, whether it's Afghanistan, whether it's Iraq, whether it's now Iran,
you've been all over the map," Obama said.

Obama touted his experience as commander-in-chief, saying America needed "strong
and steady leadership - not wrong and reckless leadership."

"I don't see our influence growing around the world," Romney countered. "I see
our influence receding, in part because of the failure of the President to deal
with our economic challenges at home."

Romney praised Obama for taking out Osama Bin Laden, but, he added, no matter
how many terrorists are eliminated, "We can't kill our way out of this mess."

The debate, at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla., and dedicated to foreign
policy, kicked off a two-week sprint to Election Day with the contest
statistically tied in national polls, but Romney with some wind at his back, a
leftover from his first debate triumph against Obama.

Obama went on the offensive from the start, intent on halting Romney's momentum.

The President claimed several accomplishments, from killing Bin Laden and ending
the Iraq War, to withdrawing troops from Afghanistan and building an
international coalition to take out Libyan dictator Moammar Khadafy.

He portrayed Romney as supporting the "failed" policies of the past.

"When I said, if I had Osama Bin Laden in my sights, I would take that shot,"
said Obama. "You said it's not worth moving heaven and Earth for one man."

That attack was part of a theme for Obama, who repeatedly accused Romney of
shifting his positions - "and sending dangerous signals to friend and foe
alike."

"One thing I've learned as commander-in-chief: You have to be clear to our
allies and enemies," the President said. "I know you haven't been in a position
to actually execute foreign policy. But every time you offer an opinion, you've
been wrong."

The President also mocked Romney's call to increase defense spending, suggesting
that his Republican rival "hasn't spent enough time looking at how our military
works."

"You mentioned the Navy and that we have fewer ships than we did in 1916," Obama
said.

"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of
our military's changed," Obama continued. "We have these things called aircraft
carriers, where planes land on them. We have these ships that go underwater,
nuclear submarines."

Romney often took issue with Obama, but not with the fire and aggressiveness he
showed in their contentious second debate, last week at Hofstra University on
Long Island.

It was an apparent attempt to appear presidential and appeal to the moderate
women voters who may decide the race.

"Well, of course I don't concur with what the President said about my own record
and the things that I've said," Romney said at one point. "They don't happen to
be accurate. . . . Attacking me is not an agenda."

Indeed, on several issues, the Republican said he agreed with Obama - leaving
little daylight between his positions and those of the President.

Romney said he supported the administration's reluctance to deploy the military
to Syria, its timetable for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan and its use of
drone strikes to kill terrorists.

Last month's violence in Libya - which claimed the lives of four Americans,
including a U.S. ambassador - was a source of a contentious exchange during the
second debate and was expected to be a flashpoint again Monday night.

Instead, the terror attack, subject of furor on the campaign trail and a
congressional investigation, passed without fireworks.

But the two men, perhaps with one eye on Jewish voters in the swing state of
Florida, did clash over America's relationship with Israel and the nuclear
threat posed by Iran.

"From the very beginning one of the challenges we've had with Iran . . . is they
saw weakness where they expected to see strength," Romney said. "And then the
President began what I'd call the apology tour . . . criticizing America . . .
creating daylight between ourselves and Israel."

Obama appeared ready for this Romney slam, calling it "probably the biggest
whopper of this entire campaign."

He then contrasted his trip to Israel as a candidate in 2008 with the one Romney
took the Holy Land over the summer.

"And when I took a trip to Israel, I didn't take donors, I didn't go for
fund-raisers," Obama said. "I went to . . . the Holocaust museum there to remind
myself of the nature of evil and why our bond with Israel will be unbreakable."

Both men often ignored the pleas of moderator Bob Schieffer and switched to
domestic policy.

Romney, in particular, frequently pivoted toward the economy, which his team
believes is the issue that will win the White House.

"In order to be able to fulfill our role in the world, America must be strong,"
the former Massachusetts governor said. "And for that to happen, we have to
strengthen our economy here at home. You can't have 23 million people struggling
to get a job."

Obama tried to make a similar appeal.

"What I think the American people recognize is that after a decade of war it's
time to do some nation building here at home. And what we can do now is to free
up some resources, to, for example, put Americans back to work," Obama said.

When Romney disputed Obama's claim that the Republican would have let the
automobile industry go bankrupt, Obama said, "Gov. Romney, you keep on trying to
airbrush history."

"If we'd have taken your advice about the auto industry, Gov. Romney, we'd be
buying cars from China instead of selling cars to China."

jlemire@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MITT ROMNEY PRESIDENT OBAMA President Obama, Mitt Romney and moderator
Bob Schieffer gather around table in final debate in Boca Raton, Fla. Photo by
AP DAILY NEWS PHOTO ILLUSTRATION

DOCUMENT-TYPE: FRONT PAGE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
