
                              31 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                   Commonwealth Journal (Somerset, Kentucky)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday

Supporters of Obama, Romney pleased with debate finale

BYLINE: Chris Harris, Commonwealth Journal, Somerset, Ky.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1155 words


Oct. 23--SOMERSET -- The debates are over. The public has been informed. All
that's left now is the vote.

On Monday night, the two major party candidates for President of the United
States -- incumbent Democrat Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney
-- held the final installment of a three-series debate (four if you include the
vice-presidential debate between Joe Biden and Paul Ryan held in Danville, Ky.)
in Boca Raton, Fla.

Over the course of the debate season, Romney has gained considerable ground in
the polls, going from several points behind Obama across the board to virtually
neck-and-neck, and even ahead in some measures, including the high-profile
Gallup Poll, where Romney now holds a five-point lead.

Of course, the popular vote doesn't determine the presidency -- the electoral
vote does. And while most projections have had Romney gaining ground there too,
he's still behind Obama in the number of states leaning or strongly going his
way. (One exception is the popular website realclearpolitics.com, which has
Romney with 206 solid electoral votes, Obama with 201, with 131 votes still up
for grabs in key swing states like Ohio, Virginia, and Florida).

In other words, the only thing voters know for sure is that their guy still has
a good shot -- and that means both Republicans and Democrats are expressing
confidence down the home stretch, while only one of them can be correct.

Cloyd Bumgardner, chairman of the Pulaski County Republican Party, echoed
Congressman Hal Rogers' sentiments after the GOP Convention in August --
Romney's campaign is bringing to mind shades of the party's hero Ronald Reagan
from 32 years earlier.

"I think back to the presidential race where Reagan ran against (sitting
President Jimmy) Carter," said Bumgardner, referencing the 1980 race where an
unpopular Democrat facing a poor economy was unseated by a substantial margin.

"There at the end, President Reagan really picked up speed and came on strong,"
he added. "I'm confident we'll see the same situation here."

Bumgardner saw Romney as the big winner of the debate season not just for the
momentum he gained, but the manner in which he presented himself, gaining
accolades in the press for his poise and focus in the face of Obama's increasing
debate aggression.

"He seems to have maintained his cool and calm disposition in the face of what I
think is a hard situation, debating with the president," said Bumgardner. "...
At the end of the day, I really believe that people will take a step back and
say to themselves, 'Which one of these candidates for president will protect
America's status in the world and grow the economy?' and I think that it will be
Romney."

The theme of the last debate targeted foreign policy issues, though as Romney
has stressed the economy -- one area where he carries a substantial lead over
Obama in public opinion polls -- as the key issue of the race, money matters
snuck in. Then again, there's a good reason for that, suggested Bumgardner.

"I thought Romney did an excellent job of laying out his foreign policy strategy
and how it ties into the economic situation," said Bumgardner. "The price of oil
affects the economy, and a lot of foreign policy issues talked about were
centered around the Middle East (from which America gets so much of its oil).
I'm not sure you can separate the two."

On this point, at least, Bumgardner agrees with Halyn Roth, president of the
Young Pulaski Democrats and former campaign organizer for Hal Rogers opponent
Jim Holbert.

"As with any debate, a lot of things are interconnected; a lot of foreign policy
is connected with domestic policy," said Roth. "Romney started talking about
domestic (issues) first, and the president had to respond, but overall I think (
Obama) stayed on topic, and I felt for his part, the moderator did a good job
trying to keep it on topic too."

The two men did find accord on more than one occasion when it came to foreign
policy. Each stressed unequivocal support for Israel when asked about a U.S.
response if the Jewish state were attacked by Iran.

"If Israel is attacked, we have their back," said Romney -- moments after Obama
vowed, "I will stand with Israel if Israel is attacked."

Both also said they oppose direct U.S. military involvement in the efforts to
topple Syrian President Bashir Assad.

"Mr. Romney seemed to agree with the president a lot but wanted to make it seem
like he didn't," said Roth. "All he seemed to want to do was speak louder, and
somehow that would make a difference.

"It was quite interesting how you can't really tell if Mr. Romney agrees with
what Mr. Romney has said in the past," added Roth. "The president pointed out
that (Romney) didn't support a timetable for withdrawal from Afghanistan in the
past, but now he does. It's confusing to have a commander-in-chief who doesn't
know what he stands for at all."

As far as Obama's stated support of Israel -- a position which Republicans have
expressed skepticism about -- Roth said, "Israel is our strongest ally in the
region where we have fewer and fewer allies. It's important to make the word
aware of this in very strong terms."

Bumgardner said that Romney's strength was coming "through the debates with a
good command of the facts and a willingness to discuss exactly where the U.S. is
on the international scene with its allies."

Obama's strength, as per Roth, was in talking about his "refocusing the 'War on
Terror' outside of Iraq and putting it back into Afghanistan where it was
actually needed, and having a firm timetable to get out of Afghanistan by 2014
and letting the Afghans run their own country."

Though Romney is gaining ground in the polls, Roth is undaunted. "It doesn't
concern me," he said. "I've learned that undecided people will get decided. ...
The polling in the swing states doesn't seem very good for him, though it is
improving, so I'm not shocked about it. I don't anticipate Romney to win."

The final debate behind them, both men are embarking on a home-stretch whirlwind
of campaigning. The president is slated to speak in six states during a two-day
trip that begins Wednesday and includes a night aboard Air force One as it flies
from Las Vegas to Tampa. Romney intends to visit two or three states a day.

Already four million ballots have been cast in early voting in more than two
dozen states.

Obama appears on course to win states and the District of Columbia that account
for 237 of the 270 electoral votes needed for victory. The same is true for
Romney in states with 191 electoral votes. The battlegrounds account for the
remaining 110 electoral votes: Florida (29), North Carolina (15), Virginia (13),
New Hampshire (4), Iowa (6), Colorado (9), Nevada (6), Ohio (18) and Wisconsin
(10).

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

___ (c)2012 Commonwealth Journal (Somerset, Ky.) Visit the Commonwealth Journal
(Somerset, Ky.) at somerset-kentucky.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121023-CG-Supporters-of-Obama-Romney-pleased-with-debate
-finale-20121023

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: CG


                      Copyright 2012 Commonwealth Journal
