
                              36 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday

US election: Obama shows who"s master

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 903 words


Like a teacher with a particularly stubborn pupil, President Barack Obama gave a
masterclass in foreign policy to Mitt Romney in their third and final
presidential debate before the election in two weeks.

Obama listened patiently as the Republican nominee explained why he wants to
boost military spending because the Navy is smaller than at any time since 1917,
and the US Air Force smaller than at its creation in 1947. He was careful not to
smirk and grin like his Vice-President, Joe Biden, did last week during the
vice-presidential debate.

But Obama"s response when it came was a devastating putdown of the former
Governor of Massachusetts. "Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and
bayonets, because the nature of our military"s changed. We have these things
called aircraft carriers, where planes land on them. We have these ships that go
underwater, nuclear submarines."

After that, it was game over. A somewhat subdued pupil actually agreed with the
teacher on the major hot-button issues. On Syria, Iran and Afghanistan, their
policies were practically indistinguishable.

On Syria, Romney protested he would not intervene militarily as President. On
Iran, described as the single most important threat to America, he insisted that
military force would be a last resort. On Afghanistan, he stressed that all
American soldiers would be out by the end of 2014. He congratulated Obama on the
killing of Osama bin Laden, although adding that the Administration lacked a
comprehensive strategy for dealing with Islamic jihadists.

Again, a putdown from the professor. "I"m glad that you agree that we have been
successful in going after al Qaeda," said Obama. The Romney strategy, however
had previously been "all over the map and is not designed to keep Americans safe
or to build on the opportunities that exist in the Middle East". Obama then
moved into flip-flop territory, Romney"s most vulnerable area in the campaign.
"Every time you"ve offered an opinion you"ve been wrong," Obama said, referring
to Romney"s earlier assertion that the number one threat to America came from
Russia.

A sitting president will always hold an advantage over a challenger in a foreign
policy debate. But Romney also failed to press the President on Libya despite
the Administration still having questions to answer about the circumstances of
the killing of Ambassador Chris Stevens in a terrorist attack on the US
consulate in Benghazi.

Obama was expecting to be attacked over his poor relations with Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu. So he pre-emptively referred to the Administration"s
consultations with Israel on Syria, and noted the "unprecedented" military and
intelligence co-operation, including on Iran. "If Israel is attacked, America
will stand with Israel," Obama said. It was left to Romney to repeat: "I want to
underscore the same point the President made which is that if I"m President of
the United States, when I"m President of the United States, we will stand with
Israel."

This last debate mattered because with the presidential race in a dead heat,
even a discussion of foreign policy provides an opportunity to influence
undecided voters.

Yet the candidates were aware that foreign policy is not the main issue on which
the campaign is being fought. After they strayed on to plans for economic
recovery in America 35 minutes into the 90-minute debate in Florida, moderator
Bob Schieffer of CBS news was left bleating: "Let me get back to foreign
policy."

As the debate wandered back to education, Romney warned Obama his plans to hire
teachers would not be enough to grow the economy, although he was careful to
add: "I love teachers." "We all love teachers," said Schieffer.

It was quite a night for the teacher-in-chief.

The debate

Barack Obama"s best lines:

"Governor, when it comes to our foreign policy, you seem to want to import the
foreign policies of the 1980s, just like the social policies of the 1950s and
the economic policies of the 1920s."

"We also have fewer horses and bayonets because the nature of our military has
changed. We have these things called aircraft carriers where planes land on
them."

"Every time you"ve offered an opinion you"ve been wrong."

Mitt Romney"s best lines:

"Attacking me is not an agenda."

"We can"t kill our way out of this mess ... We must have a comprehensive and
robust strategy."

"We"re four years closer to a nuclear Iran."

"That does not mean they [China] can just roll all over us and take our jobs."

Gaffes: A geographically challenged Romney said: "Syria is Iran"s only ally in
the Arab world. It"s their route to the sea." Moderator Bob Schieffer referred
to the former al-Qaeda leader as "Obama"s bin Laden".

Expert view: Dotty Lynch, professor of public communication at American
University: "By agreeing on the big points of foreign policy, Romney played it
safe tonight, and tried to move the conversation to the economy where he thinks
he"s stronger."

Debate snap polls

CBS: Obama 53 per cent, Romney 23 per cent, Tie 24 per cent

CNN: Obama 48 per cent, Romney 40 per cent

Latest national polls

Politico: Obama 47 per cent, Romney 49 per cent

CBS: Obama 48 per cent, Romney 46 per cent

ABC/Wash Post: Obama 49 per cent, Romney 48 per cent

Wash Times: Obama 50 per cent, Romney 47 per cent

Monmouth: Obama 45 per cent, Romney 48 per cent

Gallup: Obama 45 per cent, Romney 51 per cent

Rasmussen: Obama 47 per cent, Romney 49 per cent

IBD/Tipp: Obama 47 per cent, Romney 43 per cent

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved
