
                              38 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                           Palm Beach Post (Florida)

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

Campaigns race into homestretch;
Obama, Romney depart county

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: DELRAY BEACH


Using the same mocking tone he employed against Mitt Romney during much of
Monday night's debate at Lynn University, President Barack Obama began the final
two-week scramble of the 2012 campaign Tuesday by accusing his Republican rival
of shifting positions and experiencing "Romnesia."

As Obama began three days of campaigning in six battleground states, he and the
crowd that filled the 8,200-seat stadium at the Delray Beach Tennis Center
appeared energized by the president's aggressive debate performance the night
before.

Romney also began his day in Delray Beach, leaving the Marriott on Ocean
Boulevard early to head to campaign appearances in Nevada and Colorado on
Tuesday and Ohio today.

He's expected back in Florida this weekend.

Both sides claim they are where they want to be, heading into the final two
weeks of the campaign.

"We're in a great position. We've got the momentum," Republican National
Committee Chairman Reince Priebus said after Monday night's debate.

"We have the ball. We have the lead," said senior Obama strategist David Axelrod
on Tuesday.

Several polls and pundits said Obama outperformed Romney during Monday's
90-minute face-off on foreign policy at Lynn's Stephen C. and Elaine Johnson
Wold Performing Arts Center.

But in an election year in which the sluggish economy has been the top issue,
many analysts expect the debate over international affairs to have little
impact.

The Obama campaign acknowledged the preeminence of the economy on Tuesday as it
unveiled a new economy-themed TV ad and began distributing 3.5 million copies of
a glossy, 20-page "Plan for Jobs & Middle-Class Security."

The publication, a compilation of economic positions Obama has already
announced, is aimed at voters in Florida and other swing states.

Republicans, who for weeks have accused Obama of failing to outline an agenda
for a second term, dismissed the release of the 20-page plan.

"Running to Kinko's two weeks before an election to copy a glossy pamphlet of
repackaged ideas is the act of a desperate campaign, not of a visionary leader.
America cannot afford four more years like the last four years, but that's all
President Obama offers," said Priebus.

Priebus and other Republicans projected an air of confidence after Monday
night's debate.

While Obama may have scored more points and unleashed more memorable zingers
such as his "horses and bayonets" line, Republican spinners contend, Romney
adequately cleared the hurdle for a non-incumbent by appearing presidential and
holding his own against Obama.

Romney's campaign released an ad Tuesday featuring debate footage of Romney
accusing Obama of going on an "apology tour" in 2009 in which he visited the
Middle East but didn't stop in Israel.

Obama's rally in Delray Beach began a three-day blitz that will take the
president to five other battleground states: Ohio later on Tuesday; Iowa,
Colorado and Nevada today; back to Florida for a Tampa rally on Thursday, then
to Virginia and back to Ohio.

Amid all the swing-state campaigning, Obama also plans to visit Illinois on
Thursday so he can cast an early vote in person.

Early voting, which begins Saturday in Florida, is key for the Obama campaign
because it relies more heavily than Romney's on what Obama campaign manager Jim
Messina called "sporadic voters" -- people who don't routinely go to the polls
every two or four years.

Early voting gives the Obama campaign more opportunities to get sporadic voters
to cast ballots, Messina said Tuesday.

At Tuesday's rally in Delray Beach, former Gov. Charlie Crist was one of the
warm-up acts for Obama.

The Republican-turned-independent Crist endorsed Obama in August, has made a
variety of campaign appearances for him and raised at least $100,000 for Obama's
campaign.

"Last night we saw what a commander in chief looks like," Crist said of Obama's
debate performance.

Crist, frequently mentioned as a possible Democratic candidate for governor in
2014, told the crowd that Romney "would be a rubber stamp to the extreme agenda
of congressional Republicans as president."

Crist then turned the microphone over to Scott Van Duzer, a registered
Republican who owns a Fort Pierce pizza parlor.

Van Duzer became an instant celebrity last month when Obama visited his
restaurant and Van Duzer embraced him in a bear hug, then lifted the president
off the ground.

"Every time I need a pick-me-up, I try to see Scott," Obama said. "Scott,
Charlie Crist, they remind us that the values we're fighting for, they're not
Democratic values, they're not Republican values, they are American values."

Obama said the previous night's debate had highlighted clear differences between
himself and Romney.

"Gov. Romney's foreign policy has been wrong and reckless. ... Last night he was
all over the map. Did you notice that?"

Obama accused Romney of changing his position on a variety of issues, including
how to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

"We've come up with a name for this condition. It's called Romnesia. We had a
severe outbreak last night. It was at least Stage 3 Romnesia," Obama said. But,
he added later, "Don't worry -- Obamacare covers preexisting conditions. We can
fix you up. There's a cure for this disease."

Obama reprised a line from Monday's debate, saying Romney favored a foreign
policy from the 1980s, social policy from the 1950s and economic policy from the
1920s.

Romney's campaign called Obama's rhetoric a sign that he's trailing.

"In two weeks, a majority of Americans will choose Gov. Romney's positive agenda
over President Obama's increasingly desperate attacks," Romney spokesman Ryan
Williams said.

gbennett@pbpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                 Copyright 2012 The Palm Beach Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
