
                              18 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Obama Team Tries to Change Course After Debate Disappoints

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER and PETER BAKER

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1246 words


DENVER -- President Obama and his team woke up here on Thursday morning
confronted by the realization that he lost his first debate by passively letting
Mitt Romney control the conversation. Then the president and his advisers
resolved to do what he himself did not the night before.

Under fire from fellow Democrats, Mr. Obama came out swinging, accusing Mr.
Romney of lying to the American people about his plans for the nation. ''I met
this very spirited fellow who claimed to be Mitt Romney,'' Mr. Obama told 12,000
supporters during a lakeside rally. ''But it couldn't be Mitt Romney, because
the real Mitt Romney has been running around the country for the last year
promising $5 trillion in tax cuts that favor the wealthy. The fellow onstage
last night said he didn't know anything about that.''

He said the Mr. Romney of the debate wanted to put more teachers in classrooms
and claimed not to know companies get tax breaks for outsourcing jobs. ''The man
onstage last night, he does not want to be held accountable for the real Mitt
Romney's decisions and what he's been saying for the last year,'' the president
said. ''And that's because he knows full well that we don't want what he's been
selling for the last year.''

The vigorous assault on Mr. Romney suggested just how worried Mr. Obama's
campaign has become. The president's advisers concluded that he had lost his
first debate by not pressing Mr. Romney enough. After a series of late-night and
early-morning consultations, the Obama team decided to try to correct that
Thursday with a more aggressive stance, including the rally rhetoric, a new
television ad and a conference call questioning Mr. Romney's truthfulness.

David Axelrod, the president's strategist, called Mr. Romney an ''artful
dodger'' whose debate comments were ''devoid of honesty,'' ''rooted in
deception,'' ''untethered to the truth'' and ''well delivered but fraudulent.''

''Not surprisingly, what we learned is he'll say anything,'' Mr. Axelrod said.
''That makes him effective in the short term but vulnerable in the long term.''
He added, ''He may win the Oscar for his performance last night but he's not
going to win the presidency.''

The Romney team, feeling rejuvenated, fired back. ''In full damage-control mode,
President Obama today offered no defense of his record and no vision for the
future,'' said Ryan Williams, a Romney spokesman. ''Rather than a plan to fix
our economy, President Obama simply offered more false attacks and renewed his
call for job-killing tax hikes.''

In trying to turn the tables on Mr. Romney, the president's team was hoping to
salvage a debate performance widely criticized by Democrats and Republicans
alike. Aides described Mr. Obama as out of practice at debating and said he made
a conscious decision not to bring up some of the campaign's favorite attack
lines of recent months, a decision they left little doubt disappointed them.

Now they will have to make what Mr. Axelrod called ''adjustments'' in the
president's approach for the next debate on Oct. 16. The ''take-away from this
debate,'' he said, was that they ''can't allow someone to stand there and
manhandle the truth.''

Mr. Obama's advisers appeared almost to expect a different Mitt Romney to turn
up for the debate: the hard-edged conservative who had largely pitched his
message to the Republican base. Instead, Mr. Romney softened his rhetoric,
promising that his reform of Medicare would not touch benefits for older
Americans and praising elements of Mr. Obama's education policy. He also tried
to paint the president as a protector of big banks because of the
post-financial-crisis government bailout of the banking industry.

Campaign officials said they wished Mr. Obama had called out Mr. Romney on
assertions that they said were untrue, although they conceded that some of the
weaknesses in the president's performance were simply part of his approach to
debates, which is to shy away from highly personal confrontations. The base
wants him ''to gut Romney,'' one adviser said, but swing voters hate that and
the president was trying to find a balance.

Even so, Democrats questioned why he did not bring up a range of issues they
considered favorable to Mr. Obama, including women's rights; Mr. Romney's taxes;
the Republican candidate's comments about the ''47 percent'' of Americans who
consider themselves ''victims'' dependent on the government; and the record of
his former firm, Bain Capital. Some Colorado Democrats leaving the debate seemed
despondent at the president's performance and fretted that he had put their
state back in play.

''The president did well in terms of substance but I think there were
opportunities to hold Governor Romney accountable that may have been missed,''
former Gov. Ted Strickland of Ohio, a close ally of the campaign, said in an
interview. ''But you know, it's one debate. There are two more.''

Other Democrats picked up what they saw as Mr. Obama's missed opportunities,
assailing Mr. Romney for misleading viewers about his tax plan and other issues.
The Center for American Progress, a left-leaning organization, posted what it
called ''27 myths'' told in 38 minutes.

A new television ad produced by the Obama campaign for seven swing states showed
Mr. Romney denying aspects of his tax plan. ''If we can't trust him here, how
could we ever trust him here?'' the ad asks as a picture of the Oval Office
comes on screen. ''He was just lying,'' Mr. Strickland said. ''He was fast and
loose with the truth.'' The Romney camp countered with the various ways they
asserted Mr. Obama misled about the issues during the debate.

Appearing at his morning rally on Thursday, Mr. Obama seemed more energetic than
he had the night before. Clad in khakis and a blue Windbreaker, he mocked Mr.
Romney in a way he had not during his sober performance on Wednesday night. He
singled out Mr. Romney's promise to cut funding for the Public Broadcasting
System, including its signature children's character.

''Thank goodness someone is finally getting tough on Big Bird,'' he said. ''We
didn't know Big Bird was driving the federal deficit.''

Someone in the crowd shouted, ''Elmo,'' referring to another children's
character. ''Elmo too?'' Mr. Obama replied with a laugh.

Mr. Obama's advisers went into the debate recognizing that incumbents often lose
their first debate while seeking re-election in part because they have less time
to prepare and in part because it is the first time a challenger is onstage as a
peer with a president. They also worried that the news media, anxious for a
compelling story line, would be primed to write a Romney comeback story.

But what they did not count on was how universally the president would be
criticized by Democrats and Republicans alike for his performance. Instead of
cementing a sense of inevitability borne out of solid swing-state polls in
recent weeks, Mr. Obama has now let Mr. Romney off the mat and given him
momentum.

Whether it changes the fundamental dynamics of the campaign remains to be seen.
Mr. Obama has outgunned Mr. Romney in advertising in critical states and it is
too early to know if the polls will change in a sustained way. The next big
moment on the campaign schedule is next week's debate between Vice President
Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Representative Paul D. Ryan, Mr. Romney's running mate.

But with 33 days left, the president now finds himself entering the final month
of the campaign trying to get off the defensive and regain his footing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/05/us/politics/obama
-team-tries-to-change-course-after-debate-disappoints.html

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
