
                              41 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

NECK & NECK Bam & Mitt hit the road Take aim at 9 key states

BYLINE: BY JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 956 words


PRESIDENT OBAMA and Mitt Romney barnstormed across the country Tuesday,
beginning two weeks of ferocious campaigning in the nine battleground states
that will decide the election.

Romney swooped into Colorado and Nevada, while Obama stumped in Florida and Ohio
- both men basking in large crowds of enthusiastic supporters energized by their
third and final debate Monday night.

"His campaign is taking on water, and our campaign is full steam ahead!" Romney
told a boisterous crowd in Henderson, Nev.

"We can handle two more weeks of the attacks coming from Barack Obama. But we
can't afford four more years of what he's given us."

In Delray Beach, Fla., the President brandished a slick, full-color, 20-page
"Blueprint for America's Future" stuffed with goals and plans, answering
Romney's charge that he had no agenda for a second term.

Aides said 3.5 million copies would be distributed in the battleground states.
The blueprint repackages Obama's plans to spend more on education, boost
manufacturing jobs and raise taxes on the wealthy.

"That's how you build a strong, sustainable economy that has good middle-class
jobs to offer," Obama said. "Now it's up to you to choose the path we take from
here."

With the debates over, and fund-raising all but complete, the day represented a
turning point for the campaign combatants - the beginning of a final, brutal
blitz of electioneering in their long, bitter and costly contest.

The election is now a battle for the battlegrounds - a relentless focus on the
nine swing states that could fall into either candidate's column and determine
the election.

An ABC/Washington Post tracking poll of likely voters, released Tuesday evening,
showed just how close the race is. It found a statistical tie, with Romney at
48.51% and Obama at 48.44% - within the margin of error.

But it was Romney's first lead in the poll since Aug. 25, reflecting the
momentum he's gained since his strong performance in the first debate three
weeks ago.

Also worrying for Obama: The President's job approval rating fell to 49%,
slipping below the 50% threshold incumbents normally need to win reelection.

The poll was conducted Friday through Monday, almost entirely before the final
debate Monday night.

The Obama camp was taking solace in his narrow advantage in several battleground
states, including Ohio, according to polls there.

"There's a bit of mythology being spun up on the other side about some of these
states," said senior Obama adviser David Axelrod in a conference call with
reporters.

He suggested that anyone who claimed any battleground states were solid for
Romney were "half in the bag themselves."

While the candidates blitzed the battleground states, their campaigns launched
new political commercials and issued dueling memos arguing over who has the
advantage and why.

Team Romney turned one of his lines from Monday's debate into an attack.

"The President began with an apology tour, of going to various nations and
criticizing America," Romney says in the ad. He said America's foes "looked at
that and saw weakness."

The Obama camp launched an upbeat ad that had the feel of a campaign closing
argument. At 60 seconds long, the ad represented a significant financial
commitment in the battleground states.

The President looks directly into the camera and ticks off his administration's
accomplishments before making an appeal for a second term.

"It's an honor to be your President . . . and I'm asking for your vote," Obama
says, "so together, we can keep moving America forward."

In Florida and in Ohio, Obama picked up on the themes he pressed in Monday's
debate. He said Romney's foreign policy was "wrong and reckless," but that the
Republican was trying to hide his true convictions by suddenly claiming more
moderate positions.

"We had a severe outbreak (Monday) night - it was at least stage three
Romnesia," Obama said in Florida.

"This is about trust," the President continued. "There's no more serious issue
in a presidential campaign than trust. . . . You want somebody to be able to
look you in the eye and say, 'Here's what I believe.' "

Later, Obama joined Vice President Biden for a rally in Dayton, Ohio, where
Biden described Romney as "rushing to agree" with Obama's policies in Monday's
debate.

"Half the time I didn't know whether Gov. Romney was there to debate Barack
Obama or endorse Barack Obama," Biden said.

In Nevada, Romney countered that he is the candidate of change. He said Obama's
policies would ensure slow economic growth and high unemployment for four long
years.

"He is a status quo candidate," Romney said.

He added, "Attacks on me are not an agenda."

On Wednesday, the President is scheduled to launch a two-day, "nonstop" tour
across four time zones and thousands of miles.

He will campaign in Iowa, Colorado and Nevada before heading to Los Angeles for
a taping of "The Tonight Show" with Jay Leno. The next day, he'll forge on to
Florida, Virginia and Ohio while stopping briefly in Chicago to cast his own
ballot.

Romney will race on Wednesday from Nevada to Iowa before settling in for two
days of campaigning in the most crucial swing state of all, Ohio.

No Republican has won the White House without capturing the Buckeye State, and
even the most optimistic Romney advisers concede that their candidate's path to
victory shrinks dramatically without it.

Meanwhile, the Nielsen ratings company reported that Monday's debate was the
least-watched of the three meetings between Obama and Romney.

An estimated 59.2 million people tuned in. Their first debate had a television
audience of 67.2 million and the second had 65.6 million.

Still, Monday's debate had a larger audience than the 56.5 million people who
watched the third contest between Obama and John McCain in 2008.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NLVL

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
