
                              49 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                                Tampa Bay Times

                            October 22, 2012 Monday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

WHAT TO LOOK FOR IN FINAL DEBATE

BYLINE: ADAM C. SMITH, Times Political Editor

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 941 words



HIGHLIGHT: The candidates will stretch to make a lasting impression on foreign
policy.


The final two weeks of the 2012 campaign kick off tonight in Boca Raton with the
last presidential debate - focused on foreign policy.

Foreign affairs have largely been an afterthought in this marathon campaign
overwhelmingly dominated by the economy, and the debate offers both candidates
what is likely their last big moment to persuade voters they offer greater
leadership.

In some respects, President Barack Obama should have the advantage. He is the
incumbent who, as promised, ended the war in Iraq, ordered the mission that
killed Osama bin Laden, and according to most polls, enjoys more trust among
voters on foreign policy than Republican nominee Mitt Romney. The former
Massachusetts governor has stumbled several times on foreign policy, but without
a record to defend, he has more flexibility to pick and choose what issues to
focus on.

More than 60 million viewers may tune in at 9 p.m. for a debate that truly could
decide the presidency. Not surprisingly, the location is Florida.

Here are five things to watch:

1. Domestic policy. Yes, it's a debate focused on foreign policy, and moderator
Bob Schieffer intends to divide the 90 minutes into six segments: America's role
in the world, Afghanistan, Israel and Iran, the changing Middle East, terrorism
and China's rise.

But the economy remains the overriding issue in this race, and it's hard to
imagine Obama and Romney failing to return to domestic policy over and over
again. On this, both nominees agree: America's position and strength in the
world starts with its strength at home.

2. Leadership. Voters are unlikely to be moved significantly by slight
variations in how Romney or Obama will handle Pakistan or North Korea, but they
can be moved by perceptions of leadership. Romney tightened the race into a dead
heat after two debates where he reassured soft supporters and undecided voters
that he is a palatable alternative to President Obama, and his challenge is to
do that again when the topics are mainly outside his comfort zone.

Excessive hostility won't play as well in the context of foreign policy
discussions, so look for less heat in this debate. The format, with the
candidates seated side by side at a table, will also likely soften their
demeanor.

3. Libya. The Obama administration's shifting explanations for the Sept. 11
attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, gave Romney a rare opening to
challenge the president's foreign policy record. Yet, Romney bungled the issue
twice, much to the befuddlement of even some of his strongest supporters.

First, his campaign issued a hasty statement attacking the Obama administration,
even before people knew the scope of what happened. Then in last week's debate,
instead of pinning down Obama about the administration's handling of security at
the consulate and its shifting explanations about what occurred, he clumsily
challenged Obama's semantics and whether the president had used the term "act of
terror" soon enough.

Tonight, Romney has an opportunity to clean up the issue by aggressively
challenging the administration's handling of Libya after the fall of Moammar
Gadhafi - without looking excessively shrill and political.

4. George W. Bush. Romney rarely mentions the former president, but Bush's
shadow will hang over this foreign policy debate. Much of Romney's foreign
policy team includes some of the most hawkish neo-conservatives from the Bush
administration, while Obama's foreign policy has been defined in large part by
winding down wars that started under Bush.

Romney has fiercely criticized the Obama administration for not being forceful
enough on the world stage and too often "leading from behind." Obama has put
more emphasis on coalitions when exerting power across the globe.

A New York Times report that the Obama administration may negotiate with Iran
about its nuclear program after the election may give Romney another opening to
cast the president as too accommodating.

This is a war-weary country, however, and Obama has already implied that a
Romney administration would mean returning to the policies of President Bush,
both on the domestic front and internationally.

"If Gov. Romney is suggesting that we should start another war, he should say
so," the president told 60 Minutes last month when asked about Romney's charges
that Obama was not aggressive enough with Iran.

Nor can Obama entirely distance himself from the Bush policies he has long
criticized. He has yet to fulfill his promise to close the prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, for instance.

5. Second-term agenda. Obama has repeatedly criticized Romney for failing to
explain how his tax and budget policies add up, and what expenses and tax
deductions they would support.

Nor has Romney offered many specifics for where he actually differs with Obama
on the stickiest foreign policy issues, such as Iran, Afghanistan and Israel.

But Obama likewise has yet to offer a real explanation for what his second term
would look like, beyond broad platitudes.

The president's campaign has concentrated for months on making Romney an
unacceptable alternative to the president, but with two weeks to go he and
Romney are essentially tied. Tonight will be his last, best opportunity to
explain his plans for the next four years.

Adam C. Smith can be reached at asmith@tampabay.com

* * *

Let's talk politics

Join the Times politics editors at 11 a.m. Tuesday for a live Twitter chat by
using #TimesChat or at blogs.tampabay.com/buzz.

* * *

Debate tonight

When/where: 9-10:30 p.m., Lynn University in Boca Raton.

Topic: Foreign policy.

Moderator: CBS's Bob Schieffer.

Watch it: On major networks and cable stations. Also, YouTube and AOL will
livestream.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright  2012 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
