
                              53 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday

Presidential debate: After foreign-policy moment, it's back to Ohio (+video);
With the race dead even, President Obama and Mitt Romney close the books on
presidential debates and head into two-week sprint to Nov. 6 election, to be
fought out on the economy.

BYLINE: Linda Feldmann Staff writer

SECTION: USA

LENGTH: 871 words


The history books have closed on the presidential debates, and the two-week
sprint is on to Election Day in a race that is a virtual dead heat.

Monday night's third and final debate between President Obama and Republican
challenger Mitt Romney focused on foreign policy, but the candidates' forays
into domestic affairs reflected two truths about the 2012 race: that voters see
the US economy as by far the most important election issue, and that, when push
comes to shove, presidents face limited realistic options in carrying out
foreign policy.

In the main, the two men's differences centered more on style than on substance.
As he did in last week's debate, Mr. Obama came out aggressively against Mr.
Romney, displaying once again the spark that was missing in the first debate. He
sought to portray Romney as a neophyte on foreign affairs with pronouncements
that are either outdated or inconsistent.

"The 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back because, you
know, the cold war's been over for 20 years," Obama said sarcastically,
referring to Romney's past assertion that Russia represents America's "top
geopolitical foe."

Romney needed simply to clear the bar as credible on foreign policy if not equal
to the president, who has lived the issues for four years. And he often avoided
open conflict with the president by playing down differences as much as he
sought to create contrasts. He concurred with Obama's decision to withdraw from
Afghanistan, go after terrorists with drones, and refrain from intervening
militarily in Syria.

Inexplicably to many observers, Romney also opted not to press Obama on last
month's deadly attack on the US Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, a security lapse
that has dogged the administration. Romney got slapped down in the last debate
over the issue, some say because he (and the moderator) mishandled what should
have been a strong criticism of Obama's handling of the crisis.

But he suggested Obama had failed on Iran, calling it "the greatest threat of
all ... four years closer to a nuclear weapon."

Romney also sought to allay concerns that he might be spoiling for war, saying
that the US mission in the Middle East - and more broadly, the planet - is to
ensure peace. (Women voters in particular, a cohort where Romney has made recent
gains in polls, are turned off by saber-rattling.) Then he pivoted to his strong
suit as a candidate, the economy.

"[F]or us to be able to promote those principles of peace requires us to be
strong, and that begins with a strong economy here at home, and unfortunately,
the economy is not stronger," said the former Massachusetts governor.

Obama went after Romney on the "strength" issue by criticizing him for calling
for $2 trillion in additional military spending and a bigger Navy.

To Romney's assertion that the Navy is smaller than at any time since 1917,
Obama quipped, "Well, governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because
the nature of our military's changed."

"So the question is not a game of Battleship, where we're counting ships," Obama
added. Still, the comparison of ships to horses and bayonets won't help him win
the military vote in the battleground state of Virginia, home to the world's
largest naval base.

But the candidates agree on the core issue of linking a stronger US economy to
the nation's ability to project power overseas. That led into a discussion of
nationbuilding at home, including education policy. When the candidates began
arguing about Romney's record on education in Massachusetts, debate moderator
Bob Schieffer of CBS nudged them back to the prescribed focus of the debate.

"Let me get back to foreign policy," he said.

In the spin room afterward, aides to both candidates declared confidently their
bosses had won the showdown, and were on their way to victory in two weeks. For
Romney, who eliminated his deficit in national polls with Obama after the first
debate and maintained it after the second, the key is to close the gap in a
handful of tossup states, most important among them Ohio.

"I think the momentum continues tonight," said Ed Gillespie, a top Romney
adviser. "As we've seen, as the American people see Mitt Romney directly for
themselves and they hear him talk about his own positions, not the snippets on
newscasts ... they see he clearly has the capacity to be commander in chief, he
has a plan to make us stronger economically at home."

During the debate, Obama made his usual bow to the Midwest battleground in
bringing up his intervention to save the auto industry. Obama's advisers pointed
to the exchange on the issue as a boon to the president.

"I must say, that long, sort of uncomfortable segment on the auto bailout
tonight certainly isn't going to help Governor Romney in Michigan," said David
Axelrod, Obama's top strategist.

Still, it's Ohio - where 1 in 8 jobs is tied to the auto industry - where the
auto message is most crucial.

Obama brought up Ohio directly, in relation to a recent decision by the World
Trade Organization to bar China from placing duties on certain US steel exports.

"Just recently," Obama said, "steelworkers in Ohio and throughout the Midwest,
Pennsylvania, are in a position now to sell steel to China, because we won that
case."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
