
                              58 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Looking Closely at Statements From Candidates on Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE, MICHAEL COOPER, MICHAEL R. GORDON, RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.
and SHARON LaFRANIERE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Politics; CHECK POINT; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1452 words


Who knew that fact-checking the sole foreign policy debate of the presidential
campaign would include the ranking of Massachusetts schools and how best to
administer Medicaid? Repeatedly, the two candidates swerved to the economic
issues that have dominated the campaign.

Even the dispute over the attack on the American diplomatic compound in
Benghazi, Libya, which was expected to be a centerpiece, got less attention than
the now-familiar dispute over what kind of bankruptcy Mitt Romney had proposed
for the ailing auto industry.

But when Bob Schieffer, the moderator, wrestled them back onto foreign policy,
the two candidates offered starkly different views of the world. President Obama
described a tough, realistic America engaged with allies in ''decimating'' Al
Qaeda. Mr. Romney, even as he markedly moderated his tone and spoke repeatedly
of ''peace'' as his goal, described a far scarier world in which Iran is four
years closer to a nuclear weapon.

In many cases, the contrasting claims were a matter of perspective, and on
several occasions Mr. Romney said explicitly that he agreed with the president.
But both men also made statements that were misleading or exaggerated or that
contradicted previous statements.

Here are some of the highlights:

Change in Tone on Iran

Mr. Romney's remark that he wants to use ''peaceful and diplomatic means'' to
persuade Iran not to pursue its nuclear program was a striking departure from
the more hawkish tone he has used throughout the campaign.

He urged preparations for war against Iran last year in an opinion article in
The Wall Street Journal. ''Si vis pacem, para bellum,'' he wrote. ''That is a
Latin phrase, but the ayatollahs will have no trouble understanding its meaning
from a Romney administration: If you want peace, prepare for war.''

Mr. Romney also called for more muscle-flexing aimed at Iran in a speech on Oct.
8 at the Virginia Military Institute.

''For the sake of peace, we must make clear to Iran through actions -- not just
words -- that their nuclear pursuit will not be tolerated,'' he said.

Mr. Romney has long been dismissive of Mr. Obama's attempts to use diplomacy to
persuade Iran to abandon its weapons programs. ''In his first TV interview as
president, he said we should talk to Iran,'' Mr. Romney said in his speech at
the Republican National Convention in late August. ''We're still talking, and
Iran's centrifuges are still spinning.''

Last year, when asked in an interview what military action he would consider
against Iran, Mr. Romney said, ''There's a lot more information I need to have
to know what type of military strike would be appropriate and effective.''

''Would you be prepared to do it unilaterally if need be?'' Bret Baier of Fox
News asked.

''Of course,'' Mr. Romney said. MICHAEL COOPER

Troops in Iraq

Mr. Obama suggested that Mr. Romney was mistaken in seeking to keep 10,000
American troops in Iraq. But the Obama administration initially sought to do
just that -- but never managed to negotiate an agreement allowing them to
remain.

Mr. Obama sought to negotiate a Status of Forces Agreement that would have
allowed United States troops to stay in Iraq after 2011. Initially, the Obama
administration was prepared to keep up to 10,000 troops in Iraq. Later, the
Obama administration lowered the number to about 5,000.

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki indicated that he might be willing. But the
Iraqis did not agree to an American demand that such an agreement be submitted
to their Parliament for approval, a step the Obama administration insisted on to
ensure that any American troops that stayed would be immune from prosecution
under Iraqi law.

Mr. Obama relied on Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. as well as American
officials in Iraq to negotiate the agreement. The president spoke to Mr. Maliki
only twice during the negotiations. Also, the administration did not begin
formal talks with the Iraqis until June 2, 2011, leaving little time for
negotiation.

After the talks broke down, the Obama administration withdrew the remaining
American troops in December 2011, the deadline set for withdrawing all American
forces from Iraq under the Status of Forces Agreement.

Iran has taken advantage of the absence of American forces to fly hundreds of
tons of military equipment through Iraqi airspace to Syria. MICHAEL R. GORDON

The Arab Spring

Mr. Obama spoke of the role the United States has played during the Arab Spring
uprisings, saying, ''We have stood on the side of democracy.'' But that is not
true across the board.

Consider Bahrain, where thousands of people rose up more than a year ago to
demand political liberties, social equality and an end to corruption. Its Sunni
monarchy, seen by the United States and Saudi Arabia as a strategic ally and a
bulwark against Iran, was never left to face the rage on its own.

More than a thousand Saudi troops helped put down the uprising, and the United
States called for political changes but strengthened its support for the
government. MICHAEL COOPER

Afghan Withdrawal

Has Mr. Romney changed his view on an Afghan withdrawal and timeline? About an
hour into the debate, Mr. Romney seemed to adjust his long-held position.

In the past, he has said that while he wanted to follow the same 2014 withdrawal
timeline as the Obama administration and NATO allies, he would seek the advice
of military commanders on the ground before making a decision. This prompted
critics to suggest that Mr. Romney was giving himself wiggle room to keep
regular combat brigades in Afghanistan past 2014. (Both the Obama administration
and the Romney campaign have talked about keeping a small residual force,
presumably of Special Operations forces and military trainers, after 2014 -- if
the government of Afghanistan allows it.)

But on Monday night, Mr. Romney seemed to draw a much clearer line that he would
take all regular combat troops out of Afghanistan by 2014, without the caveat of
first asking military commanders whether they believed that was a good idea.

In response to a question about whether he would withdraw troops even if it were
obvious that the Afghans were not able to handle their own security, Mr. Romney
said, ''We're going to be finished by 2014, and when I'm president, we'll make
sure we bring our troops out by the end of 2014.''

He made no mention of first getting input from military commanders, as he has in
the past. ''We're going to be able to make that transition by the end of 2014,
so our troops will come home at that point,'' Mr. Romney said. RICHARD A. OPPEL
Jr.

'Apology Tour'

Mr. Obama responded to Mr. Romney's claim that he had undertaken a foreign
''apology tour'' as ''probably the biggest whopper that's been told during the
course of this campaign.''

Fact-checkers have repeatedly found the claim to be inaccurate. Mr. Obama has
admitted American failings at times -- and like President George W. Bush has
apologized for specific acts of American wrongdoing abroad -- but he has never
explicitly apologized for American values or principles.

Republicans often refer to Mr. Obama's 2009 speech in France in which he said
that ''there have been times where America has shown arrogance and been
dismissive, even derisive.''

But critics typically ignore what Mr. Obama said next: ''But in Europe, there is
an anti-Americanism that is at once casual but can also be insidious. Instead of
recognizing the good that America so often does in the world, there have been
times where Europeans choose to blame America for much of what's bad.''

In other words, Mr. Obama was saying that the United States and Europe had at
times each dealt unfairly with each other; he never said he was sorry for
American values or diplomacy.

RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.

China and Cheap Tires

President Obama said that China was flooding the United States with cheap tires
and that he put a stop to it and saved jobs. In fact, many economists criticize
the administration's action.

In 2009, the Obama administration unilaterally imposed a duty on imports of
Chinese tires, a move sought by the United Steelworkers union. It was one of
nine trade enforcement actions taken by the United States against China under
Mr. Obama and, some economists argue, the most questionable. The tariff
protected 1,200 American jobs at most, according to a study by the Peterson
Institute for International Economics.

But the same study found that the tariff cost American consumers $1.1 billion
last year alone in higher-priced tires, or about $900,000 per job. Moreover,
China responded by slapping tariffs on imports of chicken parts that cost
American poultry producers an estimated $1 billion in lost sales. Last month,
the Obama administration let the tire tariff quietly expire. SHARON LaFRANIERE

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/23/us/politics/looking-closely-at-the-candidates-
statements-on-foreign-policy.html

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Mitt Romney and President Obama met in their third and final
debate on Monday night at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla. The forum, which
was dedicated to foreign policy, touched on Iran's nuclear threat and the
aftereffects of the Arab Spring. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK
TIMES) CHARTS: Romney's Defense Proposal in Context: Mr. Obama said that Mr.
Romney wants to increase military spending by $2 trillion. Mr. Romney has said
that he wants to keep defense spending above 4 percent of G.D.P., which one
analysis says would be $2 trillion more than the budget Mr. Obama has proposed
over 10 years. (Source: Department of Defense
White House
Travis Sharp, Center for a New American Security)
Foreigners' Opinions of the U.S.: Both candidates spoke about America's standing
in the world and with its allies. According to this Pew poll, attitudes toward
the United States became more favorable after President Obama's election but
have declined since. (Source: Pew Global Attitudes Project)
 Credit for Less Dependence on Foreign Oil:  Mr. Obama said that the United
States has reduced its dependence  on foreign oil. True, but the trend began
before Mr. Obama took  office in 2009, and consumption continued to drop largely
because  of the recession. (Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
