
                              60 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday

All the difference in the world

BYLINE: by MIKE WERESCHAGIN and SALENA ZITO

LENGTH: 899 words


President Obama and Republican nominee Mitt Romney tangled over the state of
American leadership in the world after four tumultuous years in the final debate
of the 2012 campaign on Monday.

Obama said his policies have "decimated" al Qaida's leadership, crippled Iran's
economy and deposed dictators including Libya's Moammar Gadhafi. Romney, the
former Massachusetts governor, said economic weakness at home and perceived
weakness abroad have reduced the country's stature during Obama's term.

Bob Schieffer, chief Washington correspondent of CBS News, moderated the debate
at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla., the third between Obama and Romney. Vice
President Joe Biden and U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., met for their lone debate
on Oct. 11.

"In nowhere in the world is America's influence greater today than it was four
years ago," Romney said.

International sanctions aimed at stopping Iran's nuclear program are "crippling
their economy," Obama said.

"Their economy is in shambles," Obama said. "The reason we did this is because a
nuclear Iran is a threat to our national security, and it is a threat to
Israel's national security. We cannot afford to have a nuclear arms race in the
most volatile region in the world."

Obama tried to engage Iran directly when he first took office. When that failed,
the administration turned to international sanctions. Romney said he would have
imposed those sanctions earlier. He said if elected he would tighten and expand
sanctions to those who do business with Iran and would bring charges of genocide
against Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

"I think (Iran's leaders) saw weakness where they had expected to find American
strength," Romney said. He revived his charge that Obama embarked on "an apology
tour" around the world.

"Nothing Gov. Romney just said is true, starting with this notion of me
apologizing," Obama said.

Obama criticized Romney for saying, several months ago, that Russia is America's
top geopolitical foe. "The 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy
back," Obama said.

"Attacking me is not an agenda," Romney said. He criticized Obama for comments
he made to former  Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, which Obama thought were
private, that he would have "more flexibility" on issues such as missile defense
after the election. "I'm certainly not going to say I'll give you more
flexibility  after the election."

The candidates sparred over defense spending, with Romney accusing Obama of
presiding over a shrinking Navy and aging Air Force.

"Our Navy is smaller now than at any time since 1917. Our Air Force is older and
smaller than at any time" since its founding, Romney said.

"We also have fewer horses and bayonets," Obama shot back. The modern military
includes aircraft carriers and nuclear submarines, he said. "The question is not
a game of Battleship, where we're counting ships. It's what are our
capabilities."

On the war in Afghanistan, Obama said ending the war in Iraq and focusing on
Afghanistan -- a war that's in its 11th year -- will allow the United States to
withdraw combat forces by the end of 2014. Romney said there's a danger that the
Taliban will swoop back in once NATO forces leave.

The campaign has been dominated by domestic economic concerns, and at times, the
candidates veered back onto their economic messages. Voters often view foreign
policy debates in presidential campaigns as a barometer for leadership
qualities.

"The demeanor of the candidates tonight reflected the changing complexion of
this race as it comes down to the wire," said Bruce Haynes, a Washington-based
Republican strategist at Purple Strategies. "Romney seemed to have assumed the
role of the frontrunner, sticking to his agenda, staying positive and even
embracing the president at certain points. Obama went on the attack, looked
angry and frustrated at times, and seemed to be the candidate acting out of the
greatest sense of urgency."

Haynes' Democratic counterpart at Purple Strategies, Steve McMahon, said Obama's
immersion in foreign policy details was evident.

"The president reads a national security briefing every day, and tonight it
showed," McMahon said. "You could tell that worked against Romney in the details
in this debate."

Former two-term Democratic Congressman Joe Sestak, a retired Navy vice admiral
of Delaware County, felt the debate was close to a tie, but with Romney coming
across as having presidential timber. "I think that Romney spoke well about his
past achievements as governor of Massachusetts and appeared to lay out a more
compelling argument for the future," he said about Romney's performance in the
beginning of the debate.

"The president started to get back on track towards the end of the debate on his
accomplishments," Sestak said.

Sestak said he will be voting for Obama, but "I think Gov. Romney was a good
governor and has a strong potential to be a good president," he said.

The campaigns will renew their battle for swing-state voters on Tuesday, with
Obama campaigning in Delray, Fla., and Dayton, Ohio, while Romney rallies
supporters in Colorado.

Mike Wereschagin & Salena Zito are staff writers for Trib Total Media.
Wereschagin can be reached at 412-320-7900 or mwereschagin@tribweb.com Zito can
be reached at szito@tribweb.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2012 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
