
                              62 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                                Financial Mirror

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Obama and Romney meet for final debate as race remains tight

LENGTH: 818  words


President Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney face off in front
of the cameras for a final time on Monday in what could be their last, best
chance to win over the small sliver of voters who have yet to make up their
minds.

LAST-CHANCE DEBATE With 15 days to go until the Nov. 6 election, the two
candidates turn to foreign policy for their final debate at Lynn University in
Boca Raton, Florida. The 90-minute event starts at 9 p.m. (0100 GMT on Tuesday)
and is moderated by Bob Schieffer of CBS.

The stakes are high as polls show the race to be a virtual dead heat.

Though few voters cite the war in Afghanistan or other national-security topics
as a top concern, Obama can point to a number of successes on his watch, from
the end of the Iraq war to the killing of Osama bin Laden.

Romney will use concerns about a nuclear Iran and turmoil in Libya to try to
amplify concerns about Obama's leadership at home and abroad.

"Many voters are ready to fire Obama if they see Romney as an acceptable
alternative," said David Yepsen, director of the Paul Simon Public Policy Center
at Southern Illinois University. "Foreign policy has not been a big driver of
this campaign but I think Romney could add some icing to his cake if people say,
'Hey, this guy is on top of world affairs.'" Presidential debates have not
always been consequential, but this year they have had an impact.

Romney's strong performance in the first debate in Denver on Oct. 3 helped him
recover from a series of stumbles and wiped out Obama's advantage in opinion
polls.

Obama fared better in their second encounter on Oct. 16 but that has not helped
him regain the lead. An NBC News/Wall Street Journal survey on Sunday put the
two tied at 47 percent among likely voters.

The Obama campaign is now playing defense as it tries to limit Romney's gains in
several of the battleground states that will decide the election.

Romney could have a hard time winning the White House if he does not carry Ohio,
and a new Quinnipiac/CBS poll shows Obama leading by 5 percentage points there.

Monday's debate is the last major chance for Romney and Obama to be seen by
millions of voters before Election Day.

More than 60 million viewers watched each of their previous two encounters, but
the television audience this time could be smaller as the debate will air at the
same time as high-profile baseball and football games.

Though much of the exchange will likely focus on the Middle East, other topics
such as trade with China and the debt crisis in Europe could allow the
candidates to circle back to the economic concerns that are topmost on voters'
minds.

Romney accuses Obama of presiding over a weakening in U.S. influence abroad, but
he has to assure voters he is a credible alternative to the president on the
world stage. The former Massachusetts governor's July trip to London, Jerusalem
and Poland was marked by missteps.

The two men at their second debate last week clashed bitterly over Libya, a
preview of what is to come on Monday evening. They argued over Obama's handling
of an attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, in which Ambassador Chris
Stevens and three other Americans were killed.

The Obama administration first labeled the incident a spontaneous reaction to a
video made in the United States that lampooned the Prophet Mohammad. Later, it
said it was a terrorist assault on the 11th anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks.

This shifting account, and the fact that Obama went on a campaign trip the day
after the attack, has given Romney ammunition to use at Monday's debate.

Obama and his allies charge that Romney exploited the Benghazi attack for
political points while officials were still accounting for the wellbeing of U.S.
diplomats.

Regarding foreign policy overall, Obama's allies accuse Romney of relying on
generalities and platitudes.

"It is astonishing that Romney has run for president for six years and never
once bothered to put forward a plan to end the war in Afghanistan, for example,
or to formulate a policy to go after al Qaeda," Senator John Kerry, the
Democrats' 2004 presidential nominee, wrote in a memo released by the Obama
campaign on Monday.

Romney has promised to tighten the screws over Iran's nuclear program and
accused Obama of "leading from behind" as Syria's civil war expands. He has also
faulted Obama for setting up a politically timed exit from the unpopular
Afghanistan war, and accused him of failing to support Israel, an important ally
in the Middle East.

The Republican is likely to bring up a New York Times report that the United
States and Iran agreed in principle to hold bilateral negotiations to halt what
Washington and its allies say is a plan by the Islamic Republic to develop
nuclear weapons.

The debate will be divided into six segments: America's role in the world; the
war in Afghanistan; Israel and Iran; the changing Middle East; terrorism; and
China's rise.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 157


                        Copyright 2012 Alayam Newspaper.
              Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company
                              All Rights Reserved
