
                              70 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                              SPORTS EXTRA EDITION

WORLD BEATER BAM Jabs foe on global flips Mitt tries to ply it safe

BYLINE: BY CELESTE KATZ in Boca Raton, Fla. and JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY
NEWS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1047 words


PRESIDENT OBAMA and Mitt Romney tangled over foreign policy in their final
debate Monday night - each delivering blows they hoped would set the tone for
the final two-week sprint until Election Day.

Obama touted his experience as commander-in-chief and portrayed Romney as a
flip-flopper on issue after issue.

He called for "strong and steady leadership, not wrong and reckless leadership
that is all over the map."

Romney seemed to play it safe, frequently agreeing with the President on
international affairs while toning down some of his hawkish positions in an
apparent attempt to appeal to moderates.

Romney claimed four years of Obama's leadership has weakened America's role in
the world, no matter how many terrorists are eliminated.

"We can't kill our way out of this mess," said Romney.

"We're going to have to put in place a very comprehensive and robust strategy to
help the - the world of Islam and other parts of the world, reject this radical
violent extremism, which is - it's certainly not on the run."

The debate was supposed to be on foreign policy, though both men frequently
pivoted to domestic issues believed to be more important to undecided
swing-state voters.

Obama denounced Romney's recent claim that Russia, and not Al Qaeda, was the
biggest geopolitical threat facing America.

"And the 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back - because
the Cold War has been over for 20 years," Obama said from the stage at Lynn
University in Boca Raton, Fla.

On several issues, the Republican said he agreed with Obama, leaving little
daylight between his positions and those of the President.

He said he supported the administration's handling of the withdrawal of troops
from Iraq, its reluctance to deploy the military to Syria and its use of lethal
drone strikes.

Obama was eager to highlight his administration's accomplishments overseas and
draw distinctions on issue after issue with Romney.

"When I said, if I had Osama Bin Laden in my sights, I would take that shot,"
said Obama. "You said it's not worth moving heaven and earth for one man."

That attack was part of a theme for Obama, who repeatedly accused Romney of
shifting his positions - "and sending dangerous signals to friend and foe alike.

"One thing I've learned as commander-in-chief: You have to be clear to our
allies and enemies," the President said. "I know you haven't been in a position
to actually execute foreign policy. But every time you offer an opinion, you've
been wrong."

The President also mocked Romney's call to increase defense spending, suggesting
that his Republican rival "hasn't spent enough time looking at how our military
works."

"You mentioned the Navy and that we have fewer ships than we did in 1916," Obama
said.

"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of
our military has changed," Obama continued. "We have these things called
aircraft carriers, where planes land on them. We have these ships that go
underwater, nuclear submarines."

Last month's violence in Libya - which claimed the lives of four Americans,
including a U.S. ambassador - was a source of a contentious exchange during the
second debate and was expected to be a flashpoint again Monday night.

Instead the terror attack, subject of furor on the campaign trail and a
congressional investigation, passed without fireworks.

But the two men, perhaps with one eye on Jewish voters in Florida, repeatedly
clashed over America's relationship with Israel and the nuclear threat posed by
Iran.

"From the very beginning, one of the challenges we've had with Iran . . . is
they saw weakness where they expected to see strength," Romney said. "And then
the President began what I'd call the apology tour . . . criticizing America . .
. creating daylight between ourselves and Israel."

Obama was ready for this frequent Romney slam, calling it "probably the biggest
whopper of this entire campaign."

He then contrasted his trip to Israel as a candidate with the one Romney took
the Holy Land over the summer.

"And when I took a trip to Israel, I didn't take donors, I didn't go for
fund-raisers," Obama said. "I went to the Holocaust museum there to remind
myself of the nature of evil and why our bond with Israel will be unbreakable."

Both men often ignored the pleas of moderator Bob Schieffer and switched to
domestic policy.

Romney, in particular, repeatedly pivoted toward the economy, which his team
believes is the issue that will win the White House.

"In order to be able to fulfill our role in the world, America must be strong,"
the ex-Massachusetts governor said. "And for that to happen, we have to
strengthen our economy here at home. You can't have 23 million people struggling
to get a job."

Though more than 65 million people watched each of the first two debates, a
smaller television audience was expected Monday night.

Not only is foreign policy traditionally less of a draw, the showdown went up
against Monday Night Football and Game 7 of baseball's National League
Championship Series.

The battle in Boca concluded the candidates' debate trilogy, which began on a
night that forever changed the race.

Historically, debates have little impact on the race - but not this year.

Romney's powerhouse performance in Denver - along with Obama's oddly lethargic
showing - revived the slumping Republican ticket, which had seemed destined for
defeat.

Romney surged in the debate's aftermath, pulling even in the polls and
recharging worried Republicans.

Though Obama was largely thought to have triumphed in the second debate last
week at Hofstra, he saw far less of a bounce in the polls - leaving the race a
dead heat.

Both men will race out of the debate to swing states, hitting the trail again as
the campaign enters its final two weeks.

Obama, joined by Vice President Biden, will fly to Dayton, Ohio, where he will
yet make his case to the voters in the most important state on the electoral
map.

The following day, he kicks off his wild, two-day blitz across six battleground
states - and he'll make stops to vote and chat with Jay Leno.

Obama will hit rallies in Iowa, Colorado and Nevada on Wednesday.Romney's
schedule, though not as frantic, is just as strategic. He will spend Tuesday in
Nevada and then Colorado before flying to Iowa on
Wednesday.jlemire@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: NLVL

DOCUMENT-TYPE: FRONT PAGE

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
