
                              76 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 23, 2012 Tuesday
                                 Early Edition

Obama, Romney joust on foreign policy;
In final TV debate, President calls GOP opponent reckless while Republican
nominee blasts administration as weak on Iran

BYLINE: KONRAD YAKABUSKI

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; U.S. POLITICS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Barack Obama accused Mitt Romney of recklessness on the foreign-policy
front, while the Republican nominee blasted the administration's weakness in
dealing with Iran's nuclear ambitions, as the candidates for the White House
faced off in the last televised duel of the campaign.

The final debate before the Nov. 6 election thrust foreign policy to the fore of
an increasingly close contest that has been largely fought on domestic issues.
And it highlighted the sharp tonal, if not substantive, differences between the
candidates in dealing with a rogue Iran, a volatile Arab world and an
unco-operative Russia.

Both candidates sought to appear as strong - but sensible - leaders in a debate
in which each accused the other of weakening the country's security and
undermining U.S. influence abroad. Each candidate sought to address his
vulnerabilities, with Mr. Obama asserting his leadership in liberating Libya and
Mr. Romney channelling his inner peacenik in the face of accusations of
warmongering.

"With the Arab Spring came a great deal of hope ... But instead we've seen in
nation after nation a number of disturbing events," Mr. Romney said before
congratulating the President for "taking out" al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.
"But we can't kill our way out of this mess. We're going to have to put in place
a very comprehensive and robust strategy to help the world of Islam and other
parts of the world reject this radical, violent extremism."

Mr. Obama shot back: "What we need to do with respect to the Middle East is
strong, steady leadership, not wrong and reckless leadership that is all over
the map. And, unfortunately, that's the kind of opinions that you've offered
throughout this campaign."

Noting that Mr. Romney had called Russia the No. 1 "geopolitical threat" to the
United States, Mr. Obama added: "You seem to want to import the foreign policies
of the 1980s, just like the social policies of the 1950s and the economic
policies of the 1920s."

But Mr. Romney, seizing on a comment Mr. Obama made to then-Russian president
Dmitry Medvedev, said: "I'm not going to wear rose-coloured glasses when it
comes to Russia or [President Vladimir] Putin, and I'm certainly not going to
say to him, I'll give you more flexibility after the election. After the
election, he'll get more backbone."

While foreign policy has been seen as Mr. Obama's strong suit, particularly in
the wake of the killing of Mr. bin Laden, last month's murderous attack on a
U.S. consulate in Libya raised the spectre of a resurgent terrorist threat in
the Arab world.

Mr. Romney accused the President of mishandling the Arab Spring and proposed
providing heavy weapons to Syrian rebels, despite the risk the arms could fall
into the hands of terrorists. But he insisted he did not favour sending U.S.
troops into Syria.

Rhetorically, at least, Mr. Romney has taken more hawkish stands than the
President, raising questions about whether he would seek to use military force
against Iran and reinstate Bush-era policies disavowed by voters after more than
a decade of war abroad.

Mr. Romney has also promised to crack down on China's trade policies, labelling
it a "currency manipulator" on his first day in office, risking a trade war that
would damage both economies.

"I've watched year in and year out as companies have shut down and people have
lost their jobs because China has not played by the same rules, in part by
holding down artificially the value of their currency," Mr. Romney said. "That's
got to end."

Mr. Obama countered: "We have brought more cases against China for violating
trade rules than the previous administration had done in two terms ... We've won
just about every case that has been decided."

But a gaffe-prone summer trip by Mr. Romney to Europe and Israel generated
embarrassing headlines, and the Obama campaign openly mocked the Republican
nominee for insulting the British and Palestinians.

Despite promising to shrink the deficit, Mr. Romney proposes to re-inject
savings from winding down the war in Afghanistan back into the military. Mr.
Obama wants to apply those savings to cut the deficit and reduce the Pentagon
budget. The difference between the two amounts to nearly $1-trillion in defence
spending over a decade.

The Obama campaign launched a television ad Monday that sought to capitalize on
the popularity of the President's move to withdraw all U.S. troops from Iraq
last year. Mr. Romney favoured keeping some troops in Iraq in order to maintain
U.S. influence there.

The Obama ad said the President has a "responsible plan" for pulling out of
Afghanistan, and accused Mr. Romney of calling that plan a "mistake." Mr. Romney
has said it was an error to publicize the 2014 date for a U.S. withdrawal from
Afghanistan, since it encouraged the Taliban to "wait out" the Americans rather
than negotiate with them.

"President Obama ended the Iraq war. Mitt Romney would have left 30,000 troops
there and called bringing them home 'tragic,' " the Obama ad's narrator says.
"It's time to stop fighting over there and start rebuilding over here."

A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released on the eve of the debate showed
that, by a 46-per-cent to 38-per-cent margin, voters still favour Mr. Obama over
Mr. Romney on foreign policy. On the question of which candidate would be a
better commander-in-chief, Mr. Obama's lead was just three percentage points, 44
per cent to 41 per cent.

A Washington Post/ABC News poll out Tuesday also showed Mr. Obama with a
three-point lead on the commander-in-chief question.

*****

MEMORABLE QUOTES

Best zinger (Mitt Romney about al-Qaeda):

"It's certainly not on the run. It's certainly not in hiding. This is a group
that is now involved in 10 or 12 countries."

Best zinger (Barack Obama about Mr. Romney):

"You seem to want to import the foreign policies of the 1980s, just like the
social policies of the 1950s and the economic policies of the 1920s."

Loveliest gratuitously mean line (Mr. Obama):

"Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets ... We have these things
called aircraft carriers. This isn't a game of Battleship."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
