
                              77 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                          The Business Times Singapore

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Obama has the edge in foreign policy;
Romney hoping to reverse perception in final debate

BYLINE: Leon Hadar; in Washington

SECTION: TOP STORIES

LENGTH: 981 words


DURING the Cold War and for most the post-9/11 era of the "war on terrorism",
American voters tended to identify the Republicans as the political party that
was "tough" on national security, while Democrats were seen as being "softer"
when it came to use of military force to protect US national interests.

Republican presidents were more "muscular" than their Democratic counterparts,
and that was why voters were more inclined to elect them as presidents when it
came to managing issues of war and peace.

But under President Barack Obama, there has been a major shift in public
attitudes on the issue, with more Americans expressing confidence in the current
Democratic White House occupant's handling of foreign policy, including the
threat of terrorism, than his Republican presidential challenger Mitt Romney. In
fact, for the first time in five decades or so, voters now perceive Democrats to
be "stronger" on national security than Republicans.

But Mr Romney and the Republicans are hoping that the third and last debate
between the presidential candidates this year, that will take place at Boca
Raton, Florida, and that will focus exclusively on foreign policy will help them
reverse this trend and transform the image of President Obama from that of the
tough guy who killed Osama Bin Ladin to that of a weak and wavering president
under which the US consulate in Benghazi, Libya, was attacked by terrorists who
had killed four US officials, including the American Ambassador.

And if during the Cold War, Republicans blasted Democratic presidents for
failing to stand up to that era's main global adversary, the Soviet Union, Mr
Romney is now trying to convince voters that President Obama has engaged in a
policy of "appeasing" the current challenger to US global status, China, and
that, if elected, he will be tough on Beijing, for example, declare China a
"currency manipulator" on his first day in office.

But Mr Obama is expected to do in the debate on Monday what he had done during
the second exchange between the two candidates last week when he recalled that
as a venture capital executive, Mr Romney had encouraged American companies to
invest in businesses in China, resulting in the "outsourcing" of American jobs
to that country.

At the same time, the attacks in Libya have already ignited an angry exchange
between Mr Romney and Mr Obama during their second debate in Long Island last
week during which the Republican challenger accused the Obama Administration of
lax security arrangements in the consulate in Benghazi and of refraining from
calling the attack an act of terrorism for two weeks. Mr Obama has denied the
accusations and recalled his pledge to retaliate against anti-American terrorism
during a White House appearance a day after the attack.

But Mr Romney will almost certainly raise the issue again during the debate in
Florida and try to place it in the larger context of US policy in the Middle
East, attacking the Obama Administration's response to the so-called Arab Spring
and its handling of Iran's efforts to acquire nuclear capability. Mr Romney is
expected to argue that President Obama's policies reflect lack of resolve
vis-a-vis Iran and other radical forces in the Middle East and a willingness to
distance Washington from an ally, Israel.

President Obama will not only reject these accusations and insist that he has
embraced a set of punishing steps against Teheran to force it to end its nuclear
programme; he will also contend that Mr Romney has failed to propose any
alternative and coherent strategy, and worse, that Mr Romney's more belligerent
approach could draw the US into a new war in the Middle East, something that the
majority of voters, especially women voters, do not want to see happen.

Indeed, with less that three weeks to Election Day, women voters have become a
major target for the two presidential campaigns. Mr Obama seems to have lost the
wide lead that he had among these voters and depicting Mr Romney as a warmonger
could help him regain it since women tend to exhibit more "dovish" views on
national security issues than men.

But beyond foreign policy issues, the Obama campaign has highlighted Mr Romney's
current positions on issues related to women, like the right to have an abortion
and have (the Republican support outlawing it except for cases of rape and
incest and when the woman's life is at risk), access to contraceptions (Mr
Romney supports legislation that would allow employers on religious ground not
to cover the purchase of contraceptions by employees). President Obama also
mentioned during his campaign addresses that Mr Romney has opposed legislation
embraced by the Obama Administration that required equal pay for equal work to
men and women.

Indeed, Mr Obama will be able to win re-election only if he succeeds in
maintaining the gender gap among women - as well as his strong standing among
Latinos, African-American, and young voters - that he enjoys as a way to
counterbalance the lead that Mr Romney enjoys among men.

Mr Obama and Mr Romney are still running even in most national polls, with the
exception of the recent Gallup poll that shows Mr Romney having a lead of 7 per
cent over Mr Obama, while the president maintains a slight edge over his
Republican rival in most of the tossup states, including Ohio.

At a time when most voters place the economy at the top of their concerns in
this election, it is not clear whether the debate on foreign policy is going to
have an impact on the two candidates' standing in the race.

But overall, it seems that the exchange over US policy towards China, a global
power that is seen by many voters as a threat to their economic security could
prove to be more crucial during the debate on Monday than the issue of the
Middle East. One thing is certain: Expect both Mr Romney and Mr Obama to do a
lot of "China bashing" on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2012 Singapore Press Holdings Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
