
                              80 of 1167 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 22, 2012 Monday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

WORD WAR 3 Foreign policy points Bam, Mitt must make

BYLINE: BY JOSH GREENMAN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1053 words


BOCA RATON, Fla. - The third and final presidential debate, to be held here in
South Florida on Monday night, is about foreign policy, a realm in which
Republicans are used to having a distinct advantage.

This year, let's just say it's complicated.

The typical GOP strength is strength itself: Commanders-in-chief from the party
of Reagan, we are told, will meet America's enemies without equivocation, and
with force when necessary.

In this sense, national security debates are never just about that alone.
They're proxy wars for who's better on a whole range of other intangible
leadership qualities: principle, patriotism, toughness.

But President Obama is not the naif Mitt Romney is looking for. Once you get
past lies about an "apology tour" that never happened, the President's record
has shredded the shrinking-violet caricature. And in any event, muscle-flexing
is not what many Americans are looking for in an increasingly complex world.

This gives Romney fewer openings to attack than he thinks he has.

To the dismay of some liberals, Obama has kept in place most of the
terror-fighting tools developed during the Bush years. Romney can't, or won't,
rip him for that.

The President has ordered dozens upon dozens of drone strikes in Pakistan, Yemen
and elsewhere that have killed at least 1,600 suspected terrorists and who knows
how many civilians.

There's a valid critique to be made of that policy, but it's not one that the
hawkish Romney is willing or able to make. If the idea of American predator
drones zapping people from the skies makes you queasy, Libertarian Gary Johnson
is your man, not Romney.

Then there's the Osama Bin Laden raid, which Republicans have somehow tried to
reduce to the status of an "oh, that" footnote. The public knows otherwise, so
Romney has to tread lightly there.

Iran's nuclear program is another delicate subject for Romney. Obama has worked
with our allies to impose the toughest sanctions ever; by most accounts, they
are cratering the Iranian economy - potentially bringing Iran to the table for
one-on-one talks. Of course, this probably is just another stall. But the only
alternative to continued economic pressure is military force. Doubt Romney wants
to suggest that.

Attacking Obama for being weak in Afghanistan or Iraq would in theory be
consistent with the Republican line, but Romney is torn here. He knows most
Americans are pleased we left Iraq when we did (contra Romney, who called the
2011 withdrawal "an enormous mistake," "a failing" and "tragic"), and most are
eager to get our soldiers and Marines out of harm's way in Afghanistan.

Thus, he's wobbled down a tightrope. In an October speech, Romney called the
2014 Afghanistan withdrawal a "politically timed retreat that abandons the
Afghan people to the same extremists who ravaged their country and used it to
launch the attacks of 9/11."

Then, days later, Romney's top foreign policy adviser said his boss has "always
been" on the same page as Obama, adding that he "supports the President's
position."

Romney claims this is just a disagreement over whether the U.S. should
"broadcast" a set time line - but he risks broadcasting confusion.

The Republican attack on the Obama position vis-a-vis the Arab Spring is
similarly inconsistent to the point of incoherence. Republicans knock Obama for
being cautious in the early days of the popular uprisings, saying he should have
enthusiastically supported rebellions in Egypt and elsewhere. But they also
lament the fact that the revolutions have empowered Islamists.

Obviously, an Obama who had been more supportive of the Arab street in its early
days would have only been savaged by the GOP later as having been taken for a
ride. Republicans can't have it both ways.

Romney may try to rip Obama for being weak on Russia or China; he has called the
former America's No. 1 geopolitical foe, and has said he'll label the latter a
currency manipulator on day one in office. Obama has vulnerability here,
especially given the "flexibility" he promised the Russians in a hot-mic moment,
and the high anxiety about China "taking American jobs." Still, I'm skeptical
that the prospect of a new Cold War or trade war would sell with the public.

So where can and will Romney effectively attack, in a way that's consistent with
his foreign policy packaging?

Leaks: Someone in the Obama administration has apparently gift-wrapped a series
of stories about a heroic commander-in-chief ordering drone strikes,
cyberattacks and the Bin Laden raid, among other things - raising serious
questions about whether classified information has been breached for marketing
purposes.

Obama has said he's outraged, but it seems as though the source(s) of those
stories had to be in small rooms with the President on multiple occasions.

Israel: The Obama administration insists it remains thisclose with our strongest
ally in the Mideast, but obvious tensions between Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and the President make some evangelicals and Jews nervous.

Romney has overreached on this in the past, saying, ridiculously, that Obama has
thrown Israel "under the bus." He won't go that far, but given the crucial
importance of the Jewish vote in Florida, look for Romney to have some harsh
words.

The Benghazi murders and their fallout: This is the fight of the moment - and
the moderator will obviously return the candidates to the topic of their tense
standoff in the last debate. Obama is right that he referred to the Sept. 11
assassination of U.S. Ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens as an "act of terror"
the day after (and on other occasions), but he'll be on the defensive if forced
to explain the confusing and conflicting responses from his foreign policy team,
especially the assertions made on Sept. 16 by UN Ambassador Susan Rice.

And embassy/consulate security before the attack could also be a vulnerability.
Obama must show a deep determination to right the wrongs and to protect the U.S.
Foreign Service around the world.

Romney can leave a mark on this, provided he makes a smart and focused attack
about Obama's management rather than suggesting that the President orchestrated
a massive coverup or invited the assassination through weakness.

In national security argument, as in national security itself, you don't kill a
mosquito with a bunker buster.

jgreenman@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The Mideast faceoff between Iran's Mahmoud Ahmadinejad (l., below) and
Israel's Benjamin Netanyahu (r.) will be among the hot topics facing President
Obama and Mitt Romney at Monday night's debate. Photo by Getty Images AP EPA
Slain Ambassador Chris Stevens

DOCUMENT-TYPE: COLUMN

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
