
                              81 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday

Shifting course, Romney heads to center;
Republican steers clear of bellicose tone that he employed in primaries

BYLINE: DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1194 words

ABSTRACT

The final debate of the presidential campaign showed President Barack Obama and
Mitt Romney in broad agreement on many issues.

FULL TEXT

Mitt Romney's task in Monday night's foreign policy debate was to demonstrate
that he could be a credible commander in chief, prepared to exercise U.S. power
with more muscle and less compromise than President Barack Obama, but without
veering into what Mr. Obama called the ''wrong and reckless'' policies of the
last Republican in the Oval Office, George W. Bush.

But in a combative 90-minute debate that ranged from whether the United States
could control events in the Middle East to which man has a better chance of
forcing Iran's mullahs to surrender their nuclear program without resorting to
war, Mr. Romney avoided the more bellicose tone he often had struck during the
Republican primaries.

While he sometimes pushed back at Mr. Obama, he explicitly said he would not
intervene militarily in Syria, remain beyond 2014 in Afghanistan or rush into a
confrontation with Iran. He ended up agreeing with the broad outlines of Mr.
Obama's approach on the use of drones, and opposed a breach of relations with
Pakistan, arguably the United States' most frustrating ally.

Mr. Romney had a narrower political task on Monday night: to show he was
conversant with the subject matter and to reassure a war-weary public that he
would not plunge the United States into new conflicts.

As Mr. Romney did in his previous two debates with Mr. Obama, he shifted to the
middle, and at times he even sounded the nation-building theme that the
president talked about as a candidate in 2008 and abandoned after he was
elected.

''We're going to have to do more than just going after leaders and killing bad
guys,'' Mr. Romney argued several times, saying he would provide aid to build up
democracies and discourage terrorism - something he rarely emphasized before. He
frequently talked of bringing about a ''peaceful planet.''

Yet time and again, the president suggested that managing a world that at once
craves and resents U.S. power requires a lot more than martial-sounding
declarations about calling in airstrikes or threatening to turn U.S. foreign aid
on and off. And he relentlessly cast Mr. Romney as a man unwilling to recognize
how perceptions of U.S. strength have changed.

When Mr. Romney complained that the U.S. Navy had shrunk to its smallest size
since World War I, Mr. Obama dismissed the criticism. He noted that the
capabilities of U.S. ships were far beyond what they once were and added,
''Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets.''

For Mr. Romney, this final debate before the election in two weeks was clearly
his weakest. While he seemed familiar with a range of topics, speaking about
rebellions in Mali and ticking off the insurgent groups in Pakistan, he also
took every opportunity he could to turn back to economic issues at home, his
campaign theme. Soon the two men were arguing about domestic job creation and
support for education and teachers, until the moderator, Bob Schieffer of CBS
News, said with some exasperation, ''We all love teachers.''

Even when the conversation turned to the intersection of international affairs
and economics, Mr. Obama attacked his challenger, contending not only that Mr.
Romney's prescription for U.S. automakers in 2009 would have put Americans out
of work but also that it would have strengthened the Chinese.

''We'd be buying cars from China instead of selling cars to China,'' Mr. Obama
argued before the two men engaged in a now-familiar argument over whether Mr.
Romney's call for allowing General Motors to head into bankruptcy, without
government investment, would have weakened Detroit.

On most of the specifics they argued about, Mr. Romney had a hard time
explaining how he would act differently from Mr. Obama. He said he would not
send the U.S. military into Syria, or even attempt a no-flight zone over the
country. Though he noted several times that 30,000 people had died in the Syrian
uprising, he said: ''I don't want to have our military involved in Syria. I
don't think there's a necessity to put our military in Syria at this stage.''

It was Mr. Obama, oddly enough, who made the case for the use of force, saying
he had made the call to hunt down Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in Libya, and noting
that Mr. Romney had called that ''mission creep'' and ''mission muddle.''

Mr. Romney's response was to argue that he was better suited to rein in the
chaos in the Arab world, mostly by projecting U.S. strength. But he was less
than specific about how he would accomplish that task.

For example, when Mr. Schieffer asked him whether he would have ''stuck with
Mubarak,'' referring to Hosni Mubarak, the former president of Egypt and
longtime U.S. ally, Mr. Romney said that ''the idea of him crushing his people
was not something that we could possibly support.'' What Mr. Obama lacked was
''a better vision of the future'' for the Middle East, he said.

It was on the confrontation that could well erupt in 2013, the nuclear face-off
with Iran, that the friction between these two men, and their underlying
agreement on tactics, became most evident.

Asked whether there was a deal to be had with Iran, Mr. Obama argued that the
country was weaker than ever because he had invoked ''crippling sanctions'' as a
result of ''painstaking'' work that began ''the day we got into office.'' But he
was elusive about what exactly Iran would have to do to convince him that it had
given up any plan to build a nuclear weapons capability, simply vowing, ''We're
not going to let up the pressure until we have clear evidence'' that the
Iranians are backing down.

Mr. Romney returned to a main theme of his campaign: that the mullahs had moved
ahead with their program because ''they saw weakness where they had expected to
find American strength.'' One result, he said, is that ''now there are some
10,000 centrifuges spinning uranium.''

It was an accurate statement, but it avoided any mention of the fact that the
construction program was initially begun just before the United States invaded
Iraq in 2003, in President George W. Bush's first term. And Mr. Obama, in his
response, was constrained by secrecy laws from talking about his most aggressive
action against Iran: his decision to expand a cyberwarfare campaign against the
country.

Inevitably, the two men descended into an argument over whether Mr. Obama had
conducted an international ''apology tour,'' leading Mr. Obama to declare that
''this has been probably the biggest whopper that's been told during the course
of this campaign.'' Mr. Romney shot back that the president had said in his
speeches in the Middle East that in the past ''America had dictated to other
nations.''

''Mr. President, America has not dictated to other nations,'' Mr. Romney said.
''We have freed other nations from dictators.''

In fact, the United States has done both, and the debate on Monday night
underscored that whether Mr. Obama is re-elected or Mr. Romney moves into the
Situation Room, the United States will still find itself making compromises
between its values and its interests, because it usually has little other
choice.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
