
                              82 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 24, 2012 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debates Over, Race Reaches Fevered Pitch

BYLINE: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR and HELENE COOPER; Ashley Parker contributed
reporting from Henderson, Nev., Jeff Zeleny from Columbus, Ohio, and Jim
Rutenberg and Erik Eckholm from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1152 words


DAYTON, Ohio -- President Obama started making his closing argument for a second
term on Tuesday, beginning a furious two-week effort to beat back a late surge
by Mitt Romney and hang on to battleground states where voters are already
casting ballots in large numbers.

At the beginning of what the campaign described as a round-the-clock blitz, and
on the day after his final debate, Mr. Obama tried to address what polling has
shown is a consistent question among voters: What kind of agenda does he have
for a second term? He released a 20-page booklet encapsulating previously
announced policies and contrasting his positions to those of Mr. Romney.

The document contains no new proposals, and was derided by a spokesman for Mr.
Romney as a ''glossy panic button.'' But along with a new television
advertisement that began running in nine battleground states, the president's
aides predicted it would help counter the Romney assault plan for the next two
weeks that aims to convince voters that Mr. Obama has no plans to fix the ailing
economy.

Mr. Romney and his campaign spent Tuesday pounding away at points Mr. Romney
made during the debate on Monday night, including accusing the president of
apologizing for the United States and cutting military spending excessively. Mr.
Romney flew from Florida to Nevada, where he mocked Mr. Obama's attacks on him
as desperate moves by a losing candidate.

''You know, the truth is that attacks on me are not an agenda,'' Mr. Romney said
to a crowd of about 6,000 people in Henderson, Nev. ''His is a status quo
candidacy. His is a message of going forward with the same policies of the last
four years, and that's why his campaign is slipping, and that's why ours is
gaining so much steam.''

In the president's minute-long ad, and in appearances at the start of a frenetic
week, Mr. Obama stepped up his effort to convince the nation that he had brought
it back from the brink of economic collapse and that Mr. Romney would embrace
the policies that caused the problems. Looking directly into the camera, the
president asks voters to ''read my plan, compare it to Governor Romney's and
decide which is better for you.''

But even as he sought to strike a positive note at the start of a three-day
swing that is taking him through Ohio, Iowa, Colorado, Nevada, Florida and
Virginia, Mr. Obama also enthusiastically stepped up his attacks. The Republican
candidate, the president said at a rally in Florida, wants to ''turn back the
clock 50 years for immigrants and gays and women'' and is pursuing a foreign
policy that is ''all over the map.''

Appearing later with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. at a raucous rally
before 9,500 people in Dayton, the president went into a spirited assault, using
his new favorite attack word -- ''Romnesia'' -- to highlight his rival's
position on the auto bailout, which the White House says was vital to saving
jobs in Ohio and throughout the Midwest.

''Last night, Governor Romney looked me right in the eye, tried to pretend he
never said, 'Let Detroit go bankrupt,' '' Mr. Obama said, one of many instances
all day when he suggested Mr. Romney was not being honest about his positions as
he seeks to appeal to a general-election audience after a Republican primary
campaign in which he emphasized conservative stances.

With some polls suggesting that Mr. Romney is closing the gap, Mr. Obama's top
strategists described twin approaches: to make final appeals to independents,
moderates, women and minorities as they offer lacerating assessments of Mr.
Romney's qualifications and credibility.

Still, Mr. Obama's schedule and the tenor of his campaign appearances made clear
that his primary mission now was to energize his own supporters and get them to
vote, preferably right away. In Florida, where he appeared in the morning, and
later in Ohio,the constant refrain at his rallies was ''Vote! Vote! Vote!''
Early voting begins in Florida on Saturday and is already under way in Ohio.The
terrain that Mr. Obama and Mr. Romney are covering this week illustrates a
battleground within a battleground. The campaigns are advertising in nine states
-- stretching from North Carolina to Nevada -- but are spending most of their
most crucial resource -- their time -- in the Midwest.

Mr. Romney is scheduled to zip back and forth on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday
between Ohio and Iowa. Winning those states is the most efficient way for him to
block Mr. Obama from returning to the White House or for Mr. Obama to lock down
a path to 270 electoral votes.

In a sign of the closeness of the race, a ''super PAC'' supporting Mr. Romney,
Restore Our Future, reserved television time in Maine, traditionally a
Democratic state. Maine allocates its electoral votes by Congressional district,
and Mr. Romney's supporters hope they may be able to pick off the single
electoral vote available from the state's more conservative Second District.

In the final two weeks Mr. Romney has the challenge of maintaining a strategy of
presenting himself as more reasonable and pragmatic than the image the White
House built of him over the summer: that of an out-of-touch, job-killing
plutocrat. But to the degree that strategy involves emphasizing more moderate
positions than he stressed during the Republican primary campaign, it creates
the potential for him to face renewed questions among conservatives on his
ideological commitment.

Conversations with a half-dozen conservative activists on Tuesday suggested that
many were cutting Mr. Romney some slack. ''There's a caricature of Romney that
the Obama campaign has put out, and when he doesn't fit the caricature he is
accused of changing his view,'' said Gary L. Bauer, president of the Christian
advocacy group American Values.

In the final weeks, Mr. Romney's campaign has been discussing ways to build on
gains that have shown him closing Mr. Obama's lead in polls in states like Ohio.
Mr. Romney plans to deliver what the campaign describes as a major jobs and debt
speech on Thursday in Cincinnati, the third in a series of policy addresses
laying out how he would govern.

A new ad released Tuesday night shows Mr. Romney's closing statement from the
last debate, arguing that voters have a choice between ''two very different
paths'' for the country. ''The president's path means 20 million people out of
work, struggling for a good job,'' he says. ''I'll get people back to work with
12 million new jobs.''

The campaign is also mulling whether to expand distribution of the 10-minute
biographical video it first showed to rave reviews at the Republican National
Convention, or to buy time for a similar biographical commercial in swing
states, said two senior strategists, who had participated in those internal
deliberations.

Democrats monitoring Republican ad spending said the Romney campaign had begun
asking individual television stations about the possibility of buying time for a
long commercial.

URL:
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/24/us/politics/a-tight-focus-on-battleground-stat
es-as-campaigning-time-dwindles.html

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: President Obama kept up attacks on Mitt Romney in Delray Beach,
Fla., on Tuesday, a drive that Mr. Romney called desperate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMON
WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1)
Mitt Romney, above, appeared with Representative Paul D. Ryan in Henderson,
Nev., on Tuesday. He mocked the president's criticism, saying that ''attacks on
me are not an agenda.'' At left, a large and spirited crowd gathered in Dayton,
Ohio, for President Obama and the vice president. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN
CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A14)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
