
                              83 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                           Lowell Sun (Massachusetts)

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

Obama, Romney allies spar on foreign policy

BYLINE: The Lowell Sun

SECTION: TODAY'S HEADLINES

LENGTH: 1011 words


WASHINGTON (AP) -- On the eve of their final presidential debate, Mitt Romney
and Barack Obama -- through their allies -- squared off Sunday over which
candidate would best protect the nation's interests and security abroad with
just two weeks left in a race that polls show is increasingly tight.

Both candidates stayed largely out of view, preparing vigorously for their
Monday face-off focused on foreign policy.

Republicans accused Obama of leaking word of possible negotiations with Iran in
pursuit of political gain. Democrats shot back, arguing that Romney and his
party are the ones playing politics with national security.

The haggling played out on Sunday news shows at a critical time for Romney and
Obama, whose marathon race has become exceedingly close as it lurches toward its
November conclusion. Early and absentee voting are already under way in many of
the most competitive states, upping the pressure on both candidates to lock in
supporters.

Two weeks out, the race appears to be tied, with both candidates taking 47
percent among likely voters in a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released
Sunday that reflected a boost of support for Romney following his lauded
performance in the first debate in early October.

Romney's top supporters launched sweeping condemnations of Obama's handling of
foreign policy, assailing him over a deadly attack on the U.S. Consulate in
Benghazi, Libya, and arguing that under the president's negligent watch, Iran
has crept closer to obtaining a nuclear weapon.

Republican Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio, who played Obama in Romney's debate
preparations, said a new report claiming the U.S. and Iran had agreed to direct
negotiations seemed like "another example of a national security leak from the
White House."

"They've done a lot of that," Portman said, alluding to accusations over the
summer that Obama's administration was leaking information to bolster his
political prospects ahead of the election. He was echoed by Sen. Lindsey Graham,
R-S.C., who called the timing of the report "pretty obvious."

The White House said Saturday that while it is prepared for direct talks with
Iran, there's no current agreement to meet. On Sunday, Obama's backers credited
him for isolating Iran within the global community and adopting effective
sanctions that have crippled the Persian Gulf nation.

"For two years, the president traveled the world putting together a withering
international coalition. And now the sanctions that they agreed on are bringing
the Iranian economy to its knees," said David Axelrod, a senior Obama adviser.
"They're feeling the heat. And that's what the sanctions were meant to do."

Romney, taking a break from debate prep Sunday in Delray Beach, Fla., declined
to answer a reporter's question about whether he would be open to one-on-one
talks with Iran.

Still, Obama's allies were wedged into a defensive posture as Republicans
undertook an everything-but-the-kitchen-sink approach to deflating Obama's
foreign policy record. Graham said the Libya attack reflected "one of the most
major breakdowns of national security in a very long time." Sen. Marco Rubio,
R-Fla., in a clear nod to Cuban-American voters in his battleground state, even
suggested Obama's loosening of travel restrictions to Cuba had provided a source
of cash for the Castro regime and undermined political freedoms.

Democrats were ready with indictments of their own. Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel
said the House GOP's release Friday of 166 pages of Libya-related documents had
put lives in danger.

"People around the world will now know that you're at risk if you cooperate with
the United States," said Emanuel, Obama's former chief of staff.

Romney's supporters waxed optimistic that the race is trending in the
Republican's direction, even in crucial states like Ohio that Obama won four
years ago and where unemployment is on the decline. Portman said he's traversed
his home state over the past two weeks on behalf of Romney and likes what he's
seeing on the ground.

"The enthusiasm energy is on our side this year. I mean, it's not like 2008 at
all," he said.

Both candidates dedicated their weekend to intensive study for the debate; Obama
huddled with advisers in Maryland and Romney with his team in Florida.

On the agenda were Iran-Israel tensions, China, terrorism and the war in
Afghanistan -- all subjects expected to come up Monday in the 90-minute
encounter moderated by CBS News' Bob Schieffer. Although polls show the economy
is of top concern to most voters, global affairs have cropped up as a key issue
in the final weeks due to unrest in Libya, Syria and elsewhere.

Romney paused his preparations to attend church with his wife Sunday morning and
to watch his traveling press corps play touch football against his senior staff.
The former Massachusetts governor presided over a coin toss on the beach, then
gathered his aides to cheer them on.

"That's right, don't worry about injuries guys, this counts. Win," he joked.

Romney didn't talk politics, refusing to answer a question about whether, if
elected, he would be open to direct talks with Iran. Questions from reporters
about the new poll and Monday's debate likewise went unanswered.

Obama arrived Friday at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland's
Catoctin Mountains, where he's been holding 12-hour practice sessions, starting
with policy discussions at 10 a.m. Obama and his team hold mock debates in the
evening in a set designed to look like the one in Boca Raton, Fla., where the
two White House hopefuls will square off for the last time. Ron Klain, a former
White House aide brought back for debate prep, is playing the role of Schieffer.

Axelrod and Portman spoke on NBC's "Meet the Press," while Emanuel appeared on
ABC's "This Week." Graham spoke on "Fox News Sunday" and Rubio on CBS' "Face the
Nation."

------

Hunt reported from Delray Beach, Fla. Associated Press writer Julie Pace in
Washington contributed to this report.

------

Follow Josh Lederman on Twitter:http://www.twitter.com/joshledermanAP

Follow Kasie Hunt athttp://www.twitter.com/kasie

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Barack Obama, right, and Republican presidential candidate,
former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, exchange views during the second
presidential debate Thursday at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y. AP Photo
Sun staff photos can be ordered by visiting our MyCapture site.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
