
                              84 of 1167 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                            October 22, 2012 Monday

THE FOREIGN POLICY DEBATE

BYLINE: By David E. Sanger

SECTION: NEWS; National; World; Local

LENGTH: 1665 words


BC-OBAMA-ROMNEY-REVIEW-NYT

THE FOREIGN POLICY DEBATE

By DAVID E. SANGER

(Sunday Review)

(News Analysis)

(NOTE TO INTERNATIONAL CLIENTS: For international clients' use by special
arrangement only. Asian and European points: contact Philippe Hertzberg in Paris
for details and prices, phone: 47-42-17-11; FAX: 47-42-80-44; e-mail:
phertzberg(AT)nytimes.com. Latin American points: contact Isabel Amorim Sicherle
in Sao Paulo, phone/fax: 55-11-3023-3331; e-mail: sicheia(AT)nytimes.com.)

David E. Sanger is the chief Washington correspondent for The New York Times.

c.2012 New York Times News Service

WASHINGTON -- Over a long campaign, it's become maddeningly difficult to tease
out concrete differences in how President Barack Obama and Mitt Romney would
deal with an angry, unmanageable world that at once craves and resents U.S.
intervention.

Iran? Romney promises toughness, decries the administration's naivete that it
could talk with the mullahs and declares, when pressed, that he would bring
about "crippling sanctions." An amused Obama says he's already checked that one
off, leaving unsaid the cybersabotage that was directed toward Iran's nuclear
program out of the Situation Room. Afghanistan? It's a race for the exits, with
Obama at a fast trot and Romney at a brisk walk, now that he has discarded his
primary-season vow that we stay around to kill the Taliban. Obama is helping
funnel light arms to the Syrian rebels; Romney would send heavy arms, and
neither can explain how they would separate secular rebels from jihadists.

These fine gradations -- exaggerated for effect two weeks before Election Day --
will presumably be on display Monday night at the final presidential debate. But
with luck, viewers will get a glimpse of the real, gut-level difference in how
these two men perceive the future of American power.

In Romney's telling, America can -- and must -- restore itself to the glory days
when it had unquestioned pre-eminence in the world. It was a brief, shining
moment -- that decade bracketed by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
destruction of the World Trade Center, when the United States was what the
French called, with some derision, a "hyperpower." A longing for that era lurks
in Romney's critique of what has gone wrong in the Obama years, which he
describes as a messy age of jihadist revivals, new nuclear worries and a looming
threat from Beijing, and an era in which, he wrote recently, "our country seems
to be at the mercy of events rather than shaping them."

For his part, Obama is a man who tends to live in the moment, reacting to the
world's problems while trying to define an emerging Obama doctrine, though it is
a phrase the president never utters. To Obama, that unipolar moment is a gauzy
memory. Those longing for it are pining for a global order that cannot exist
again. The essence of Obama's approach has been that the United States will act
unilaterally whenever its direct interests are threatened -- think of the Osama
bin Laden raid or of the drone strikes and cyberattacks. But he has hesitated to
act in cases where he believes others have greater interests at stake than we
do: thus America's halfhearted commitment to the military effort to oust Moammar
Gadhafi in Libya, and its refusal to take a major role in ousting President
Bashar Assad from Syria.

If there is a lesson of the past decade, in Obama's mind, it is that we can no
longer afford to fight every war, insert ourselves in the middle of every
dispute and get stuck in the muck of occupying nations whose fates are not
central to our national interest. Nor can we stop rising powers from ... well,
rising.

"The United States does not seek to contain China," Obama was quick to tell the
Chinese on his first visit to Beijing, in November 2009, when he was less than a
year into his term. "On the contrary, the rise of a strong and prosperous China
can be a source of strength for the community of nations." Old Cold Warriors
cringed, but so did many in the president's own party, whose biggest concerns
about China focus on jobs and economic influence. It is a view Secretary of
State Hillary Rodham Clinton gave voice to when she whispered to the prime
minister of Australia on her way to Beijing in 2009: "How do you deal toughly
with your banker?"

Obama has a tough task. It is a lot easier to go on the trail arguing for
America as No.1 than it is making a case that America's leverage comes in its
ability to work with allies.

"It's an incredibly difficult balance, especially for anyone running for
president," said R. Nicholas Burns, who spent nearly three decades as one of
America's top diplomats before he left his post as George W. Bush's
undersecretary of state for political affairs to teach at Harvard. "Gov. Romney
is right to say America must lead, and we are still the indispensable power and
must remain a strong and active world leader. But President Obama has developed
a modern and effective view of leadership that I think resonates with anyone who
has done this kind of work for a living: that in places like Libya, you have to
challenge the NATO allies and the Arab states to be in the front lines, and that
Americans know we can no longer be everywhere and do everything."

Romney's aides say he, too, will use American power sparingly. But the core of
Romney's argument is that the Obama approach is a sure recipe for slow decline.

Maybe these are the differences to be expected between a president who spent his
elementary-school years in a yearning middle power in the Pacific -- Indonesia
-- and a candidate who was raised in the glory days of industrial America,
before the humbling of America's auto industry became a symbol of things to
come. Obama's writings about his youth openly questioned whether American power
was used wisely in the Cold War years. Romney's candidacy has been tinged with
Eisenhower envy and almost pretends the Bush years never happened. Obama's
starts with the gritty reality that the response to the Sept. 11 attacks cost
America $3.3 trillion and counting. One line kept coming back in his speeches on
Afghanistan: "So we can't simply afford to ignore the price of these wars," he
said at West Point, in late 2009, when he announced the "surge" that just ended,
with a whimper, last month. "The nation that I'm most interested in building is
our own."

If that difference flares up anywhere on Monday night, it may be over the
defense budget. This is the only part of the federal budget that Romney views as
sacrosanct: He wants a bigger Army, and a Navy that builds 15 new ships a year,
a 50 percent increase. It is part of his call for a more muscular America, one
that can take on Russia if it ever lives up to Romney's description of it as
America's "greatest geopolitical threat" (which Obama mocked in the first
debate) and can keep China from pushing us back toward the middle of the
Pacific.

But he has not, at least in his public comments, aligned that with a strategy of
when and how he would have the United States intervene around the world. Would
we re-enter Afghanistan if the Taliban tried to retake Kabul? Finish the job
with U.S. troops in Syria if it looked as if Assad would hang on, killing
thousands more? Join in a military strike against Iran on the theory that
America's national interest must be identical to Israel's?

So far, we don't know.

Obama, in contrast, has made clear that the era of sending 100,000 troops to
occupy countries for years on end, only to leave amid fuming resentments, is
over. His budgets reflect his doctrine: more for cybertechnology like the kind
used against Iran, more for drones and Special Forces, and less for keeping a
large armed force on hand. That became clear last December, when he gathered the
nation's combat commanders into the State Dining Room at the White House and,
under the gaze of Abraham Lincoln's portrait, told his audience the party was
over. The defense budget had grown 67 percent, in real terms, in the decade
since the Sept. 11 attacks, and was wildly higher than it was during the Cold
War.

So after the Pentagon asked for funding last year to keep 100,000 troops ready
for "stability operations" around the world -- the kind of operation the United
States ran in Iraq and Afghanistan -- the White House suggested they hadn't read
the memo: Obama is out of the occupation business. He seemed to take to heart
the parting warning of Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, the Republican who
served under the last two presidents. On his way out the door, Gates said that
anyone in his job "who advises the president to again send a big American land
army into Asia or into the Middle East or Africa should 'have his head
examined,' as General MacArthur so delicately put it."

Gates' view certainly seems to be in tune with the electorate these days. That
explains why Romney has been so tentative about translating his call for a more
muscular American approach to the world into specifics. He is trapped, to some
degree, by the legacy of George W. Bush -- while he wants to reject the Obama
doctrine as too weak and unprincipled, he cannot bring himself to embrace Bush's
first-term enthusiasm for pre-emptive action, or his second-term argument that
the United States has a moral obligation to rewire societies that can give rise
to despotism or terrorism.

The question of when America should intervene around the world -- and when to
leave it to others -- has been the subtext of most major national security
debates here for the last decade. Syria is the crisis du jour, but it will not
be the last weak state that threatens to devolve into chaotic, violent collapse
-- and become new territory for extremists. What we have not decided, as a
country, is how much risk we are willing to live with as those states crack,
collapse and are reborn. Obama has put together a nuanced approach that worked
in Libya and has frozen in place in Syria. It will be up to Romney to explain if
he has found a third way. Alt Heads:

THE FOREIGN POLICY DEBATE

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
