
                              21 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                             El Paso Times (Texas)

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Showdown in Denver: Obama, Romney spar over economy in first debate

BYLINE: By John Ingold \ The Denver Po st

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1178 words


Replay live tweets from the debate from Times editor Bob Moore
   Photos: 2012 presidential debate at University of Denver

DENVER -- Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney rhetorically charged at
President Barack Obama in their first presidential debate at the University of
Denver on Wednesday in a clash that was notable for Romney's aggressiveness and
Obama's reluctance to engage in a direct fight.

Like a bull to a matador, Romney time and again turned toward Obama to deliver
attacks on the president's job performance, portraying him as clueless to his
policies' impacts and hopeless in trying to turn the economy around.

And time and again, Obama looked at moderator Jim Lehrer or directly into the
camera -- to the viewers at home -- in responding, painting Romney as secretive
about his plans and unwilling to admit their true cost.

Helpless to contain the clash, Lehrer was frequently verbally overrun.

National political observers -- journalists, consultants and politicians --
tended to agree: Obama got trampled.

From the opening moments, Romney signaled his intent to go directly at Obama.

"Under the president's policies, middle-income Americans have been buried," he
said during one of the first exchanges of the debate. "They're just being
crushed. Middle-income Americans have seen their income come down by $4,300.
This is a tax in and of itself. I'll call it the economy tax. It's been
crushing."

Obama accused Romney of hiding the true cost of his plans. Romney's tax cuts
would cost the federal budget $5 trillion in revenue. To pay for them without
increasing the deficit, Obama said, would mean deep spending cuts to programs
people care about in education, health care and other areas. He said it was
unrealistic for Romney not to consider tax increases to balance spending cuts.

"We're going to have to make some decisions," Obama said. "And if we're asking
for no revenue, then that means that we've got to get rid of a whole bunch of
stuff."

Throughout the rest of the debate, Romney peppered his remarks with verbal
jousts.

On the government's role in the economy: "What we're seeing right now is, in my
view, a trickle-down government approach, which has government thinking it can
do a better job than free people pursuing their dreams. And it's not working."

On health care: "It's expensive. Expensive things hurt families."

On the federal budget deficit: "The amount of debt we're adding, at a trillion
(dollars) a year, is simply not moral."

Obama went barb-for-barb on occasion with Romney. In one exchange, Romney said
his tax plan would lower taxes on the middle class without adding to the
deficit. Obama criticized that as mathematically impossible, and then accused
Romney of backing away from earlier proposals.

"For 18 months he's been running on this tax plan," Obama said. "And now, five
weeks before the election, he's saying that his big, bold idea is, 'never
mind.'?"

But, more commonly, Obama sought to defend his policies and speak directly to
voters, looking straight into the TV camera while doing so.

In defending efforts to tighten financial regulations: "Does anybody out there
think that the big problem we had is that there was too much oversight and
regulation of Wall Street?"

In criticizing Romney for not including more details of his plans in messages to
voters: "The American people have to ask themselves, is the reason that Governor
Romney is keeping all these plans c secret because they're too good? Is it
because that somehow middle-class families are going to benefit too much from
them?"

In his defense, Romney said he would be flexible in how he accomplished his
goals and not straitjacketed by rigid proposals. "My experience as a governor is
if I come in and lay down a piece of legislation and say, 'It's my way or the
highway,' I don't get a lot done," he said.

After the debate, as both parties' spin machines whirred, Romney supporters said
their guy had won the night.

"You saw a CEO versus an academic," said U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner, R-Colo. "You
saw an academic try to explain away four years of failure, and a CEO explain a
vision of getting this country back to work."

Obama supporters countered that their candidate had provided a sober explanation
of his policies that would appeal to the public if not the punditry.

"President Obama did what he needed to do," said U.S. Rep. Diana DeGette,
D-Colo., "which was explain how his policies are going to grow the economy and
keep the middle class solid for the next four years."

At 7 p.m. sharp, Romney and Obama walked onto the red-and-blue bedecked stage at
the University of Denver's Magness Arena and shook hands.

It was the moment of the campaign so far: The national showdown scaled down to
two men in dark suits. After months of jabbing and criticizing and even mocking
each other on the stump -- 1,352 days since Obama took office, 489 days since
Romney announced his candidacy -- this was the first time in the campaign they
had looked each other in the eyes.

Romney seemed to enjoy the combativeness of the debate. At one point early in
the debate, Lehrer said, exasperatedly, "Excuse me. Excuse me. Just so everybody
understands, we're way over our first 15 minutes."

"It's fun, isn't it?" Romney responded.

Obama seemed more ruffled by the sometimes unruly nature of the debate. When
Lehrer one time told Obama he had run over his response time, Obama responded,
"Sorry."

There were no such apologies between the candidates.

In a rare instance of speaking directly to Romney, Obama said: "The magnitude of
the tax cuts that you're talking about, Governor, would end up resulting in
severe hardship for people, but more importantly, would not help us grow."

Romney, though, appeared ever ready to sting back. He said Obama had
mischaracterized his plans and his statements.

"Mr. President, you're entitled as the president to your own airplane and to
your own house, but not to your own facts," Romney said.

His tax plan, he said, would reduce taxes on small businesses, giving them more
money to hire workers and helping the economy to grow. The argument that tax
cuts would lead to spending cuts, he said, was a false connection.

"The revenue I get is by more people working, getting higher pay, paying more
taxes," Romney said. "That's how we get growth and how we balance the budget."

The debate ended with a composure that belied the combat of the previous 90
minutes.

Obama made an appeal to voters to continue the work he started in his first
term.

"I promised that I'd fight every single day on behalf of the American people,
the middle class, and all those who were striving to get into the middle class,"
he said. "I've kept that promise and if you'll vote for me, then I promise I'll
fight just as hard in a second term."

Romney, meanwhile, cast the election as a fork-in-the-road choice for Americans.

"There really are two very different paths that we began speaking about this
evening," Romney said. "And over the course of this month we're going to have
two more presidential debates and a vice-presidential debate. We're talk about
those two paths."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney and President Barack Obama
during the presidential debate Wednesday, October 3, 2012 at the University of
Denver. John Leyba, The Denver Post

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


           Copyright 2012 El Paso Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved
