
                              22 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Presidential debate: Mitt Romney injects new life in his campaign;
With the obits of his campaign all but written, Mitt Romney defies expectations
and turns in a lifetime performance in the first presidential debate with rival
Barack Obama. Suddenly, it's a new race.

BYLINE: Linda Feldmann Staff writer

LENGTH: 1004 words


The final month of the 2012 presidential race just got more interesting.

By turning in a stronger debate performance than President Obama - the instant
post-game consensus of Republicans, Democrats, and voters themselves - GOP
nominee Mitt Romney has injected new life into a campaign that had nearly been
given up for dead, despite only a slim deficit in polls.

Here's a new poll to consider: A CNN/ORC survey of 430 Americans who had watched
the debate, taken immediately after its conclusion, found that 67 percent said
Mr. Romney performed better, versus only 25 percent for Mr. Obama. The
likelihood of Obama's reelection, as measured by the online betting market
Intrade, plunged from 74 percent before the debate to 66 percent Thursday
morning.

Even some of Obama's strongest supporters were brutal in their assessments, even
before the debate had ended.

"I can't believe I'm saying this, but Obama looks like he DOES need a
teleprompter," tweeted comedian Bill Maher, who has donated $1 million to the
biggest pro-Obama "super political-action committee."

Immediately after the debate, Obama spokespeople appeared subdued in TV
interviews. But by the morning after, the campaign was back on offense, accusing
Romney of lying throughout the debate.

"When the dust settles, Romney's dozen flat-out falsehoods will be the only
thing remaining from his debate performance - because avoiding the truth has
been the very definition of Romney's candidacy, and he can't escape that with a
single smooth appearance," the Obama campaign said in an introduction to a
videotape replaying the alleged lies.

The Romney campaign, for its part, released a new TV ad Thursday morning
pounding home the central message of his debate performance: That he is all
about job creation.

"Through his policies including tax reform, expanding trade and cracking down on
China, he'll create over 12 million new jobs and get our country back on track,"
the Romney campaign said in its statement about the ad.

Romney came to the Denver debate stage prepared, perhaps even a bit
over-prepared, with talking points about his view of Mr. Obama's plan for the
nation: four more years of "trickle-down government," marked by higher taxes
that would hit not just the wealthy, but also the small businesses that are the
engine of economic growth.

During the debate, Romney tore through reams of statistics about job-creation,
the No. 1 concern of voters amid 43 straight months of unemployment over 8
percent.

"Fifty-four percent of America's workers work in businesses that are taxed not
at the corporate tax rate but at the individual tax rate. And if we lower that
rate, they will be able to hire more people," Romney said, looking ever the
polished businessman he was for 25 years.

"For me, this is about jobs," he concluded.

Obama responded by accusing Romney of saying "never mind" to his tax plan, and
threatening to harm the middle class by eliminating tax deductions and programs
that make sure "everybody's getting a fair shot."

Romney's approach "will not grow our economy because the only way to pay for it
without either burdening the middle class or blowing up our deficit is to make
drastic cuts in things like education," Obama said.

Romney fought back hard, beating back moderator Jim Lehrer's attempts to enforce
the debate schedule's time limits. He accused Obama of planning to raise taxes
on "successful small businesses from 35 percent to 40 percent" at a cost of
700,000 jobs.

"I don't want to cost jobs," he said. "My priority is jobs."

Not only were Republicans thrilled with Romney's performance - likening it to
his take-down of former House Speaker Newt Gingrich at a critical point in the
Republican primaries - Democrats not affiliated with Obama's campaign were tough
on the president. Many observers opined that Obama didn't seem all that eager to
be on the debate stage Wednesday night.

"I think he was off his game tonight," said James Carville, the mastermind of
President Clinton's first election in 1992, on CNN after the debate.

Democrats were stunned that Obama made no reference to the damaging videotape of
Romney at a private fundraiser dismissing the 47 percent of Americans who pay no
federal income tax, or to Romney's record at Bain Capital, including layoffs.

But no one is counting Obama out. There are nearly five weeks and three more
debates to go - two presidential and one vice-presidential - before the Nov. 6
election. Obama, in fact, has a history of ups and downs as a political
performer, and a history of coming back when he gets knocked down.

Romney, too, has a history of getting knocked down, then reviving when his back
is against the wall.

Indeed, Romney had to do well in Wednesday's debate, or the half-written
obituaries on his campaign would likely have been completed. Perhaps Romney's
biggest regret will be that the debates started so late in the campaign. Early
voting has already started in some states, including Ohio, arguably the most
crucial battleground in the country, which opened its polls on Tuesday. No
Republican has ever won the presidency without winning Ohio.

"It's too bad that voters didn't see this Romney sooner," says Republican
strategist Ford O'Connell, suggesting that the former governor showed glimpses
of the "reasonable, practical" Massachusetts moderate whom Democrats feared.
"The only person who had a worse night than President Obama was Sesame Street's
Big Bird."

During the debate, when asked what federal spending he would cut, Romney
targeted the Public Broadcasting Service, home to the children's show "Sesame
Street." He expressed love for the show's large, feathery central character.
Then he followed with a nod to the debate's moderator, Mr. Lehrer of PBS's
"Newshour," another icon of public TV.

"I actually like you too," Romney said.

The quip seemed prepackaged, but no matter. It was a light moment in a fairly
dry debate, and for a candidate who has struggled with likability, it was one of
many reasons Republicans have a spring in their step Thursday morning.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
