
                              23 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Mitt Romney scores points in presidential debate, but will it help him?;
Mitt Romney appeared more at ease and in control than did President Obama at
Wednesday's presidential debate in Denver, with experts saying it might have
done him 'some good.'

BYLINE: Amanda Paulson Staff writer

LENGTH: 1253 words


Mitt Romney came into the first presidential debate on the attack, aggressively
pushing Obama on job creation, the economy, and healthcare, and making his best
effort to reverse the trends of the polls and perceptions that he cares more
about upper-income Americans than the middle class.

It was a surprisingly strong performance from the Republican presidential
candidate, who many expected would be at a disadvantage compared with President
Obama.

"On style, Mitt Romney came out the very aggressive debater and had a lot of
punch in his remarks," says Dotty Lynch, a public communications professor at
American University in Washington. "On substance, both of them made some
points,... but I think Romney may have done himself some good."

Obama, in contrast, forcefully combatted Romney's proposals - and questioned the
lack of details in his plans - but refrained from the attacks many pundits had
expected, on Romney's personal wealth and tax rates, his tenure at Bain Capital,
or his comments seeming to dismiss the 47 percent of Americans who don't pay
federal income taxes.

The debate, held at the University of Denver in the battleground state of
Colorado, was the first of three between the two presidential candidates and has
gotten intense attention because the stakes are so large. The race has been
tightening in the past week, and both candidates came to the stage Wednesday
night needing both to convince the small number of undecided voters left,
particularly in battleground states, and to energize their supporters to go to
the polls.

Mr. Romney came in with the most to gain Wednesday night, trailing both in
national polls and in most key swing states, and he also had lower expectations
from voters about his performance.

According to one recent Washington Post/ABC News poll, 51 percent of likely
voters expected Mr. Obama to win Wednesday's debate, versus 33 percent who
thought Romney would.

He seemed to far outstrip those expectations Wednesday night, countering Obama
with short, sharp answers and a focused smile that stood in contrast to Obama's
longer, more rambling answers and somewhat professorial demeanor.

A format that gave candidates more time - a full 15 minutes - to discuss a
single question didn't seem to help keep them from running over time.

Both Romney and Obama steamrolled over moderator Jim Lehrer's occasional
attempts to rein in their talking, and in the end, there were just 3 minutes
left to discuss the final question, on partisanship in government.

The economy, as expected, dominated the debate, and so many numbers were lobbed
in the first half of the debate that viewers might be excused for thinking they
were in a math classroom or a budget committee briefing.

One number that surprisingly didn't come up: the now-famous 47 percent figure,
from Romney's private talk to donors in which he disparaged the portion of the
electorate that doesn't pay federal income taxes.

Romney, as expected, went to great lengths to show just how much he does care
about the middle class, promising tax relief to middle class families, and
promising he was not going to reduce the share of taxes paid by the wealthy.

"Middle income families are being crushed," he said.

His repeated insistence that Obama's characterization of his tax cuts was wrong,
in fact - and that he won't put in place a tax cut that adds to the deficit -
finally prompted Obama to retort that "for 18 months [Romney] has been running
on this tax plan, and now, five weeks before the election, he's saying his big
bold idea is 'never mind.' "

Obama seemed strangely lacking in energy for much of the debate, though he came
on stronger in the final half hour, and repeatedly returned to subjects where he
felt he was strong: education, which played a much more prominent role in the
debate than many expected, and his compassion for middle-class Americans.

He also scored more effective points when he repeatedly called Romney to task
for his lack of details on his proposals.

Romney "says he's going to close deductions and loopholes for his tax plan ...
but we don't know the details," Obama said. "He says he's going to replace
Dodd-Frank, Wall Street reform, but we don't know exactly which ones. He won't
tell us. He now says he's going to replace Obamacare and ensure that all the
good things that are in it are going to be in there and you don't have to worry.
And at some point, I think the American people have to ask themselves, is the
reason that Governor Romney is keeping all these plans to replace secret because
they're too good?"

Romney, for his part, finally had an answer to how he shifted his stance on
health care, from creating the Massachusetts law that is the model for Obama's
health-care law - as Obama pointed out several times during the debate - to
promising to repeal the law.

"I like the way we did it in Massachusetts," said Romney, going on to emphasize
the bipartisan support the law there had. "What we did in Massachusetts is a
model for the nation state by state."

Romney also got off a few of the much-anticipated "zingers" one of his aides had
promised in recent days, at one point telling Obama, "Mr. President, you're
entitled to your own airplane and your own house, but not to your own facts."

But the debate, for the most part, stayed civil - even though both candidates
repeatedly talked over Lehrer, and left him with almost no time for his
questions on the governing and the role of government, after he hit jobs, the
deficit, entitlements, and health care.

In terms of the nonverbal messages that often make more difference than what is
said - remember Al Gore's sighs and President George H.W. Bush looking at his
watch - Romney also may have come out ahead.

Obama didn't commit any major errors, but his sustained seriousness didn't help
him, where Romney appeared more at ease.

"To the extent that the debate hinged on demeanor, Romney won hands down," says
Jack Pitney, a government professor at Claremont McKenna College in California.
"He was cool, confident, and he kept his gaze on Obama. Obama didn't seem strong
or focused."

Obama's performance, says Professor Pitney, reminded him of the mistakes
President Bush made in 2004, when he kept grimacing during Sen. John Kerry's
comments. "Expect a lot more Obama smiling next time," Pitney says.

What's unclear, of course, is how much the performance will matter.

Walter Mondale notably beat Ronald Reagan in their first debate in 1984, notes
Pitney, and then went on to lose 49 states.

Romney "was more prepared with short answers on some of the back and forth,"
says Professor Lynch of American University. Obama, she says, seemed to want to
stick with substance and issues he thinks will resonate with voters rather than
score debate points. "But sometimes voters have a different take."

Fact checkers were working overtime during and after the debate, picking apart
candidates' claims on job creation, entitlements, and their tax plans.

Romney made some waves when he said he had no plan to cut education funding,
given that in the past he has promised to do just that.

One cut Romney did promise in the debate if he becomes president: funding for
the Public Broadcasting Corporation.

"I'm sorry Jim," he told Lehrer, who is an editor at PBS's News Hour, in one of
the most tweeted-about lines of the night. "I like PBS. I love Big Bird.
Actually like you, too. But I'm not going to ... keep on spending money on
things to borrow money from China to pay for."

That answer at one point prompted 17,000 tweets per minute for "Big Bird."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
