
                              25 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                Suburban Edition

A tale of four candidates

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 1524 words

DATELINE: DENVER


DENVER - Wednesday's presidential debate was a tale of four candidates: the two
men who stood onstage for 90 minutes and the two rivals Americans have seen for
months on the campaign trail and in television commercials. There was no
comparison.

Start with President Obama, who may have lost the exchange in as lopsided a
manner as any incumbent in recent times. Others have stumbled in the first
debates of their reelection campaigns. Ronald Reagan in 1984 and George W. Bush
in 2004 come to mind. Both had bad moments that cost them their debates.

Obama didn't lose because he had a few bad moments. Challenger Mitt Romney
dictated the tone and the tempo of the evening, at times acting as candidate and
moderator. The president fell behind in the opening minutes and never really
found his footing. He lacked energy stylistically and he lacked crispness
substantively. He sounded like he does in his news conferences: at times
discursive and often giving answers that were longer than necessary.

This wasn't the Obama seen in his campaign commercials or in the daily scrum
with Romney's operation. His team has waged an extraordinarily aggressive effort
from the moment Romney wrapped up the Republican nomination.

Given his vulnerability over the state of the economy, Obama and his advisers
sought to define Romney before Romney could define himself. It seemed to work.
The campaign attacked the Republican for his work at Bain Capital, for not
immediately releasing his tax returns, for putting money in a Swiss bank account
and in the Cayman Islands.

Obama mentioned none of that Wednesday. It was as though he left his best attack
lines in a folder backstage. Inexplicably, he never mentioned Romney's recently
unearthed "47 percent" comment - his line that nearly half of all Americans pay
no federal income taxes, that they consider themselves victims, that they're
dependent on government and that they're unwilling to take control of their
lives.

If those issues weren't worth mentioning during the debate, why has Obama's
campaign spent the past four months and hundreds of millions of dollars driving
home that message? Perhaps his advisers think they've done all the damage they
need do with those attacks. There is evidence that they've stuck. Perhaps the
president did not want to project a persona that conflicts with the candidate
who captivated the country with a message of hope and inspiration four years
ago.

Whatever the case, his performance left Democrats wondering what happened. As
one strategist put it in an e-mail message Thursday morning, "ughhh."

Tad Devine, another strategist who was a senior adviser to Democratic nominee
John F. Kerry in 2004, sent an e-mail with this assessment of the president's
apparent strategy Wednesday: "I assume they had a strategy not to engage or get
too personal. He was like he had been in many previous debates, but in these
very different times, cool and calm is not as powerful as it once was. They have
to recalibrate or risk being pushed aside by the new and improved Romney."

Romney, too, seemed disconnected from the candidate Americans have seen over the
past year. On the campaign trail, he is awkward. He is corny and wonky. His
stump speeches neither soar nor strike home with real force. Only in debates did
he shine during the primaries ,and on Wednesday he was back on comfortable
ground. He knew his brief and he seemed happy to deliver it face to face with
the president.

Romney did what he wasn't fully able to do at the Republican National
Convention, which was to make the debate as much about Obama's record as
possible while giving viewers a better sense of what he would do to get the
economy moving.

But who was the Romney Americans saw on Wednesday? This was not the candidate
who lurched to the right to win the GOP nod. This was not the nominee of a
Republican Party that is more conservative than it was when conservative icon
Reagan was president. This was moderate Mitt from Massachusetts, the turnaround
artist with a plan to fix the economy.

As William A. Galston of the Brookings Institution put it in a post-election
analysis, "Romney presented himself as a reasonable man - neither an extremist
nor an ideologue. He calmly rebutted familiar attacks on his proposals. He was
clear and forceful, tough but respectful."

But in the aftermath of the debate, Romney will face plenty of questions about
his agenda, including the one that the president never asked on Wednesday.
Romney insisted repeatedly that he does not have a $5 trillion tax-cut plan that
would favor the wealthy, although independent analysts have said it would.

If that's not his plan, what is? How much would it cost? And how would he make
the math add up? He rebutted Obama's criticism by deflection, not by engagement.
He still hasn't said what loopholes and tax expenditures and deductions he would
get rid of.

In the hours after the debate, Obama campaign advisers insisted that they would
tear into Romney for what he said and didn't say. The president did not make his
criticism stick in person. He'll have two more chances to do so in upcoming
debates. But the next opportunity will be Vice President Biden's, when he
debates GOP vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan on Thursday in Kentucky. It's
unlikely he'll leave the 47-percent issue backstage.

Both sides believe that the contrasts drawn on Wednesday favor their candidates.
Obama's team says Romney is on the wrong side of public opinion on Medicare, on
dealing with the deficit and on protecting the middle class. The Republican's
team argues that Obama is on the wrong side of public opinion in calling for
higher taxes, more spending and more regulation. Obama called Romney's economic
plan trickle-down; Romney said Obama's plan is "trickle-down government."

Republicans were elated by what happened Wednesday. They knew that a bad
performance by Romney might have all but doomed his chances of winning the
election. Now they see a race joined again. Stuart Stevens, the campaign's chief
strategist and a target of considerable criticism over the past month, looked
particularly pleased as he fielded questions from reporters after the debate.

Stevens has argued for months that Obama not taking ownership of his record
would be his biggest obstacle to reelection. He said the debate proved that. "I
don't think [Obama] had a particularly bad debate," he said. "He has a bad
record."

Stevens said polls show a virtual tie nationally and noted that challengers
often don't overtake an incumbent until the very end of the campaign. Obama
advisers stressed that Romney still has a narrow path through the battleground
states to win the 270 electoral votes he needs and they seemed determined to
make that part of whatever narrative comes out of Wednesday's exchange.

Democrats were sobered by how the president did during the debate but think that
fundamentals still work in his favor. Stan Greenberg, a Democratic pollster,
said Romney's victory was "convincing, but hardly changed the race." He said
that the Republican's performance probably would win over some GOP-leaning
independents who had been wavering or tilted toward Obama, but that underlying
forces will help the president.

"That said," he added, "I think the president will have to be much more
passionate about the changes he will bring, and bolder. In our dial tests, his
best scores were right at the beginning when he laid out four things he would
do. People are still looking for what the candidates will do. Obama will have to
show much more."

Devine said the effect of the debate is taking away Democrats' hope that Obama
might score a big victory in November and help other party members in
down-ballot races. "That huge opening may now be lost if Romney makes up ground
or, even worse, if it looks like he will win," he said. "People want progress
and to turn the page after 11 years of doubt, and last night Romney looked more
like the guy who could and would turn that page for them."

Said Steve Rosenthal, a Democratic strategist with ties to organized labor: "
Romney is a top-notch debater and the president had an off night. Debates are
like speed bumps - you have to slow down to get past them but then you can
resume your normal cruising speed. The public is evenly divided, and this is
going to be a race to the end. Now it's onto the next [debate], but hopefully
last night was a wake-up call to anybody on our side who had grown overconfident
or complacent."

It will take days for the impact of the exchange to filter through the
electorate. Only then will it become clear whether or how much it changed
things. Romney far exceeded expectations, and for now that has made this a
different contest.

balzd@washpost.com

For previous columns by Dan Balz, go to postpolitics.com.

Name                                                    Blurb
Flag              true                                    Variable Size Panel
Image
Panel Image
Background Image

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
