
                              26 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                    The Evening Sun (Hanover, Pennsylvania)

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Analysis: Romney's debate performance changes the game

BYLINE: By David Lightman McClatchy Newspapers

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1159 words


DENVER - It's a new race for the White House. Mitt Romney changed the game with
his aggressive, confident performance in Wednesday's Denver debate, and erased
the specter of doom that has dogged his campaign for weeks.

President Barack Obama's forces had hinted that all they needed was one good
punch to knock out Romney after the Republican spent the summer and early fall
stumbling.

Instead, the Romney whom viewers saw Wednesday was the one his friends have long
known: the conversational, smart, decent-on-his-feet guy, eager to defend his
views vigorously and declaring that his yen for cutting taxes and changing
seniors' health care systems made sense.

An even cursory dig into the details of those Romney plans - details that are
often elusive - will continue to give Democrats ammunition against him, and
Obama could recover quickly by relentlessly pressing Romney on those points.

Obama also can take solace in history, which shows that incumbent presidents
often falter in first debates - see George W. Bush in 2004 or Ronald Reagan in
1984 - and then come back and win.

But a strong performance by a challenger does reshape the race in several ways.

Romney donors and grass-roots workers get a fresh, badly needed shot of momentum
and energy.

Wavering voters also pay fresh attention. The undecideds, a small but crucial
sliver of the electorate, tend to be people who rarely tune in to politics but
will notice at least part of a debate. Such voters are usually younger, without
the kinds of steady political allegiances that ultimately drive many voters to
reluctantly back their parties' candidates.

Another group of voters to watch is the persuadables, folks who say they'll vote
one way but still can be swayed. They're the ones who say they'll go with Obama
because they don't like Romney or vice versa.

A bravura debate performance can change that equation. Suddenly, they may have
someone to vote for, not against.

A debate such as Wednesday's spurs other changes. The culture takes notice. A
Pew Research Center poll recently found that people thought Clint Eastwood's
encounter with an empty chair at the Republican National Convention was the
event's highlight, not Romney's acceptance speech.

In the coming days, should Obama's performance get lampooned on "The Daily
Show," "Saturday Night Live," Leno and Letterman, it could create an impression
that lasts, an image of the president as too academic, too cold, uneasy with
being challenged.

"Obama's life and his operating style had been built around avoiding
confrontation," Bob Woodward wrote in his book "The Price of Politics," as he
described the president's frosty relationship with Democratic congressional
leaders.

That style was apparent Wednesday. Toward the end of the debate, Romney, known
as a friendly, easy conversationalist, offered a rambling but upbeat assessment
of how he would govern.

"As president I will sit on day one - actually the day after I get elected -
I'll sit down with leaders, the Democratic leaders as well as the Republican
leaders, and continue, as we did in my state, we met every Monday for a couple
of hours, talked about the issues and the challenges in the - in the - in our
state in that case," he said.

Obama gave a dismissive look and quipped that Romney is "going to have a busy
first day, because he's also going to repeal Obamacare, which will not be very
popular among Democrats as you're sitting down with them."

Then he got lofty, trying to invoke that above-the-battle tone that served him
so well four years ago. "But look," the president said, "my philosophy has been,
I will take ideas from anybody." Then he launched into a long description of
policies.

That style is going to be harder to sell at the next presidential debate, Oct.
16 in Hempstead, N.Y., where the stakes have been instantly ratcheted up.

Speculation will focus on whether Obama can look and act comfortable, whether he
can make the eye contact with the audience he seemed to lack Wednesday. The town
hall format will feature audience members asking questions about foreign or
domestic policy.

The Obama camp was clearly rattled after Wednesday's debate. "And I think that
Mitt Romney, yes, he absolutely wins the preparation. And he wins the style
points," Deputy Campaign Manager Stephanie Cutter told CNN.

Campaign senior adviser David Axelrod conceded that Romney "is very good on the
attack. I was not at all surprised." He said the Obama strategy wouldn't change,
that when voters reflected on the two candidates, "they'll remember a
thoughtful, honest leader debating against someone else trying to sell
implausible theories."

Axelrod ticked off the theories: Romney's vow to cut income taxes 20 percent and
claiming that the budget deficit wouldn't balloon, yet failing to offer details.
Or his plan to offer seniors federal help to buy Medicare or private coverage
after 2023, a plan that Obama says would wreck Medicare.

Any such logic Thursday was overwhelmed by the grim mood. After the debate,
twice as many Romney surrogates appeared to talk to reporters. The Obama people
left the scene quickly. A CNN/ORC International poll of 430 people just after
the debate found that 67 percent thought Romney did a better job. CBS polled
uncommitted voters, and they gave Romney a 46-22 percent edge.

None of this means that Romney is about to surge. Democratic nominee Walter
Mondale thought he had momentum after the first 1984 debate, when Reagan
appeared vague and confused, raising questions about whether, at 73, he could
still do the job. But Reagan recovered in the next debate two weeks later and
went on to win 49 states.

What Romney's showing does is get the undecideds and persuadables, most of whom
are struggling for economic security, to take another look. Obama's approval
numbers have languished around 50 percent, consumer confidence remains sluggish,
unemployment is stuck over 8 percent and the economy grew at a miserable 1.3
percent pace last quarter.

Romney, saddled with his own troubles, has been unable to crack the 47 percent
mark in most polls. He has been dogged by his comments about how 47 percent of
Americans are "victims" dependent on government, on his refusal to release 10
years of tax returns, his investments while running the Bain Capital private
equity firm and more.

But on Thursday, it's Obama who's on the defensive. "This was the first time the
president really had to answer for his record," Romney senior strategist Stuart
Stevens said.

Romney suddenly has momentum, and the race resets.

More from the debate

Romney comes on strong in presidential debate

FACT CHECK: Checking on presidential debate

Big Bird, poor Jim: The online presidential debate

Read more about Obama, Romney sparring during the first debate

What wasn't asked at the first presidential debate?

How did York County residents react to the debate?

A video timeline of keys moments from the debate.

Five job-related fact checks about the debate.

Hispanics get little outreach.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Republican presidential candidate and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney speaks to adviser Bob White and others on his campaign plane in Denver,
Thursday, Oct. 4, 2012. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 MediaNews Group, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
