
                              27 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                             October 5, 2012 Friday


BYLINE: PETER BAKER and MARK LANDLER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: DENVER

ABSTRACT

The president's advisers woke up Thursday to the sinking realization that he had
lost his first debate by passively letting his challenger control the
conversation.

FULL TEXT

President Barack Obama and his team woke up here on Thursday morning confronted
by the realization that he had lost his first debate by passively letting Mitt
Romney control the conversation. Then the president and his advisers resolved to
do what he himself did not the night before.

Under fire from fellow Democrats, Mr. Obama came out swinging, accusing Mr.
Romney of lying to the American people about his plans for the nation.

''I met this very spirited fellow who claimed to be Mitt Romney,'' Mr. Obama
told 12,000 supporters at a lakeside rally. ''But it couldn't be Mitt Romney,
because the real Mitt Romney has been running around the country for the last
year promising $5 trillion in tax cuts that favor the wealthy. The fellow
onstage last night said he didn't know anything about that.''

He said the Mitt Romney of the debate wanted to put more teachers in classrooms
and claimed not to know companies get tax breaks for outsourcing jobs.

''The man on stage last night doesn't want to be held accountable for the real
Mitt Romney,'' the president said. ''He knows full well that we don't want what
he's been selling for the last year. If you want to be president, you owe the
American people the truth.''

The vigorous assault on Mr. Romney suggested just how worried Mr. Obama's
campaign has become. The president's advisers concluded that he had lost his
first debate by not pressing Mr. Romney enough. After a series of late-night and
early-morning consultations, the Obama team resolved to correct that Thursday
with a more aggressive stance, including the rally rhetoric, a new television ad
and a conference call questioning Mr. Romney's truthfulness.

David Axelrod, the president's strategist, called Mr. Romney an ''artful
dodger'' whose debate comments were ''devoid of honesty,'' ''rooted in
deception,'' ''untethered to the truth'' and ''well delivered but fraudulent.''

''Not surprisingly, what we learned is he'll say anything,'' Mr. Axelrod said.
''That makes him effective in the short term but vulnerable in the long term.''
He added: ''He may win the Oscar for his performance last night but he's not
going to win the presidency.''

In trying to turn the tables on Mr. Romney, the president's team was hoping to
salvage a debate performance widely criticized by Democrats and Republicans
alike. Aides described Mr. Obama as out of practice at debating and said he had
made a conscious decision not to bring up some of the campaign's favorite attack
lines of recent months, a decision they left little doubt disappointed them.

Now they will have to make what Mr. Axelrod called ''adjustments'' in the
president's approach for the next debate on Oct. 16. The ''takeaway from this
debate,'' he said, was that they ''can't allow someone to stand there and
manhandle the truth.''

Mr. Obama's advisers appeared almost to expect a different Mitt Romney to turn
up for the debate: the hard-edged conservative who had largely pitched his
message to the Republican base. Instead, Mr. Romney softened his rhetoric,
promising that his reform of Medicare would not touch benefits for the elderly
and praising elements of Mr. Obama's education policy. He even tried to paint
the president as a protector of big banks because of the post-financial crisis
government bailout of the banking industry.

Campaign officials said they wished Mr. Obama had called out Mr. Romney on
assertions that they said were untrue, although they conceded that some of the
weaknesses in the president's performance were simply part of his approach to
debates, which is to shy away from highly personal confrontations. The base
wants him ''to gut Romney,'' an adviser said, but swing voters hate that and the
president was trying to find a balance.

Even so, Democrats questioned why he did not bring up a range of issues they
considered favorable to Mr. Obama, including women's rights, Mr. Romney's taxes,
the Republican candidate's comments about the ''47 percent'' and the record of
his former firm, Bain Capital. Some Colorado Democrats leaving the debate
fretted that he had put their state back in play.

''The president did well in terms of substance but I think there were
opportunities to hold Governor Romney accountable that may have been missed,''
former Governor Ted Strickland of Ohio, a close ally of the campaign, said in an
interview. ''But you know, it's one debate. There are two more.''

Other Democrats picked up on what they saw as Mr. Obama's missed opportunities,
assailing Mr. Romney for misleading viewers about his tax plan and other issues.
The Center for American Progress, a left-leaning organization, posted what it
called ''27 myths'' told in 38 minutes.

A new television ad produced by the Obama campaign for seven swing states showed
Mr. Romney denying aspects of his tax plan. ''If we can't trust him here, how
could we ever trust him here?'' the ad says as a picture of the Oval Office
comes on screen. ''He was just lying,'' Mr. Strickland said. ''He was fast and
loose with the truth.''

The Romney camp countered with the various ways they asserted Mr. Obama misled
about the issues during the debate.

Appearing at his morning rally on Thursday, Mr. Obama seemed more energetic than
he had the night before. Clad in khakis and a blue windbreaker, he mocked Mr.
Romney in a way he did not during his sober performance on Wednesday.

He singled out Mr. Romney's promise to cut funding for the Public Broadcasting
System, including its signature children's character. ''Thank goodness someone
is finally getting tough on Big Bird,'' he said. ''We didn't know Big Bird was
driving the federal deficit.''

Someone in the crowd shouted, ''Elmo,'' referring to another children's
character.

''Elmo, too?'' Mr. Obama replied with a laugh.

Mr. Obama's advisers went into the debate recognizing that incumbents often lose
their first debate while seeking re-election in part because they have less time
to prepare and in part because it is the first time a challenger is on stage as
a peer with a president. They also worried that the news media, eager for a
compelling story line, would be primed to write a Romney comeback story.

But what they did not count on was how universally the president would be
criticized by Democrats and Republicans alike for his performance. Instead of
cementing a sense of inevitability borne out of solid swing-state polls in
recent weeks, Mr. Obama has now let Mr. Romney off the mat and given his
opponent a surge of momentum.

Whether it changes the fundamental dynamics of the campaign remains to be seen.
Mr. Obama has outgunned Mr. Romney in advertising in critical states, and it is
too early to know if the polls will change in a sustained way. The next big
moment on the campaign schedule is the debate next week between Vice President
Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Representative Paul D. Ryan, Mr. Romney's running mate.

But with 33 days left, the president now finds himself entering the final month
of the campaign trying to get off the defensive and regain his footing.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
