
                              28 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

First post-debate poll shows Romney closing the gap on Obama

BYLINE: Harry Entenguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 923 words

ABSTRACT

Harry J Enten: Preliminary data show that voters agree Romney 'won' the first
presidential debate. But significantly, Obama is not losing ground

FULL TEXT

The first post-debate poll conducted by Reuters/Ipsos indicates that President
Obama is still leading Mitt Romney in voting intention, by 48% to 43% - but the
gap has closed from 48% to 39% pre-debate. I am wary of using a relatively
untested online (not phone) poll for analysis, but the survey trends do a good
job illustrating why Obama is vulnerable, and yet still ahead in this post-
debate environment.

1). Mitt Romney remains relatively unknown, and Wednesday night probably helped
his favorability

Americans know President Obama. They either approve of the job he is doing or
they don't. They either hold a favorable view of him or they don't. There's not
a lot that is going to change that with a month to go till election day.

As I discussed last Sunday, Obama's favorability ratings are actually
historically low for a person to get elected president. In fact, no president in
CBS News/New York Times, Gallup or NBC/Wall Street Journal data has ever been
elected with a net favorability as low as his.

The issue has been that Mitt Romney's favorability has been even lower.
Wednesday night's debate was seen by nearly 70 million people. After a strong
performance, the Ipsos data has Romney gaining 10 points in net favorability. A
good portion of that is Republicans coming back home. Still, if Romney can be
seen as a viable alternative to the president among at least 50% of the
electorate, he's at least in the ball game. Wednesday night helped him down that
path.

2). Barack Obama may have to begin floating on air to win this election

Analysts like to say that Obama is defying gravity by winning in such a poor
economy. I've pointed out that this belief is poppycock, as the economy is
strong enough for an incumbent to get re-elected. Obama was also leading or tied
with Romney on the economy in general, and on pretty much every specific
economic issue, including jobs, the middle class and taxes. His lead on other
issues and his overall favorability edge combined were going to carry him to
victory.

The problem for Obama is that his standing on many of these economic issues may
have eroded significantly. Mitt Romney gained 9 points on the economy overall,
pre- and post-debate, and is up 9 points on taxes, 7 points on jobs and
unemployment, and 6 points on the federal deficit (already a strong issue for
Romney). If you start applying shifts like this to surveys such as the
historically accurate NBC/Wall Street Journal poll, then Romney leads on these
issues by 7 to 20 points. Again, Ipsos is only a one-night online survey, but
the numbers must be at least somewhat worrying for the president.

3). Romney has the potential to continue to gain ground over the weekend

It usually takes time for campaign events to fully sink in with the American
electorate. Consider the Democrats' highly successful convention. Obama started
to gain points immediately, but it wasn't until about week after the the
convention that we fully understood the full ramifications of how it shook up
the race.

Immediate public reaction to the debate isn't as important as how the media
portrays the debate in news coverage. It would seem that this coverage is only
going to drive more supporters into the Romney camp. The initial reaction on
Twitter, a good source for trends, was 3:2 in favor of Romney winning the
debate. That reaction jumped to 4:1 after the debate when the conventional
wisdom began to take hold. On Thursday night, Public Policy Polling found
Virginia voters declaring the winner of the debate to be Romney by a 3:1 margin.
That's a wider spread than any of insta-post debate national polls.

4). Despite all of this movement in Romney's direction, Obama is still at 48%

This, folks, is flatout key. Note that Romney gained ground, but Obama didn't
lose any in the overall score. The fact is that in an election with strong
third-party candidates, the winner is only going to need about 49% of the vote.
Obama is right on the goal line. Romney would have to gain almost all the
undecideds to overtake Obama. It's mathematically possible, but also
mathematically unfeasible. For it to really work, Romney either has to dislodge
current Obama support or change the make-up of the electorate. There's no sign
he's done either yet.

5). Obama remains personally popular regardless of the issues

There are two types of fundamentals: issues-based ones and personality-based
ones. President Obama led on both of these heading into the debate. Indeed, the
two often coincide with one another, but not always. Al Gore won on the issues
in 2000, but lost on the character traits. Todd Akin wins on the issues (save
for his original comments on rape) in Missouri, but most definitely loses on the
personality side.

Obama's favorability rating was unchanged pre- and post-debate. At least in the
Ipsos poll, he still has higher net favorability than Romney. I wouldn't be
surprised if that deteriorates, should Romney manages to lead on the key issues
of the economy going forward. If, however, the issues and personality
fundamentals remain in conflict, there's very little that predicts an election
outcome as well as the favorability difference between the two candidates.

So, the initial polling does not change my views about debate-effects. Romney
seems poised to close a 3- to 4-point gap by picking up latent support, but he
is probably still going to trail a week from now.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
