
                              29 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Campaign Gains A New intensity in Debate's Wake

BYLINE: By JIM RUTENBERG and PETER BAKER; Mark Landler contributed reporting
from Madison, Wis.; Ashley Parker from Fishersville, Va.; and Jeff Zeleny from
Denver.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1288 words


DENVER -- President Obama and Mitt Romney confronted what one feared and the
other hoped was an altered campaign on Thursday, pounding new urgency into what
was shaping up as a wide-open final sprint to Election Day.

A day after the first debate, in which Mr. Obama was almost universally judged
to have underperformed and Mr. Romney to have seized his opportunity, the
president resolved to do what he did not do the night before: He went straight
at the challenger, arguing forcefully that Mr. Romney's moderate words masked
extreme conservative policies.

''The man onstage last night, he does not want to be held accountable for the
real Mitt Romney's decisions and what he's been saying for the last year,'' the
president said at a rally, looking more energetic than he was at his lectern
Wednesday night.

Mr. Romney's senior aides warned staff members and donors that the race was
hardly won. But they said the debate reversed the sagging morale of volunteers
and contributors and dispelled what had been a growing notion that the race was
slipping away from Mr. Romney.

They said it prompted undecided voters to give Mr. Romney ''a second look,'' as
his pollster Neil Newhouse put it. And they said it showed that Mr. Romney could
win a head-to-head argument with Mr. Obama on the economy, his campaign's
underlying strategy all along.

With roughly a month left, both sides were looking intently ahead to Friday
morning, when the government releases unemployment and job creation numbers for
September, the next opportunity for one of the candidates to try to seize
momentum for the final month.

Reflecting the new intensity of the post-debate landscape, both sides
recalibrated their strategies, escalated their advertising campaigns in swing
states, and drew huge crowds for rallies.

Greeted by an estimated 10,000 people in Fishersville, Va., Mr. Romney said,
''What you didn't hear last night from the president is why it is the next four
years are possibly going to be better than the last four years.''

After leaving Denver, Mr. Obama went to Madison, Wis., where he was met by an
estimated crowd of 30,000, the biggest of the campaign so far.

In a display of strength intended to offset Democratic nervousness, Mr. Obama's
campaign signaled it had raised well over $114 million in September, its biggest
one-month haul this year and a sum that all but ensures its ability to match or
exceed advertising and get-out-the-vote spending by Mr. Romney and his allies.

But that did not overcome the rain of questions about how it came to be that the
president delivered such a listless showing.

Mr. Obama's aides said he knew he had had a bad night as soon as he came off the
stage at the University of Denver. ''I'm sure he drew some lessons from it,''
said David Axelrod, the president's senior adviser.

Advisers, many of whom viewed him as distracted and nervous from the beginning,
said the president had approached the debate practice sessions without enough
urgency and focus. He has told friends that he respected Mr. Romney's intellect,
but had come to view his rival as a less formidable adversary as he learned more
about him from reading research books and watching his campaign.

Hours before the debate, advisers said they were worried that during his
preparation sessions in a financially distressed resort in Nevada he was
frequently interrupted by his presidential duties, and they indicated that they
were nervous that he was underprepared. What seemed like an exercise in lowering
expectations appeared to be reality at the end of the debate night.

Mr. Axelrod said the president was prepared to talk about what was viewed as Mr.
Obama's biggest omission on Wednesday, Mr. Romney's secretly recorded comments
at a closed-door fund-raising event about the ''47 percent'' of Americans he
described as too reliant on government. While Mr. Axelrod said Mr. Obama simply
never found an opportunity, another aide offered another suggestion: To have
done so would have given Mr. Romney an opening to undo the political damage of
the remarks with a certain, planned answer before a huge television audience of
67.2 million.

In an interview with Sean Hannity of Fox News late Thursday, Mr. Romney said he
would have said, ''I said something that's just completely wrong.'' He had
previously stood by the substance of the remarks, which he said were stated
inelegantly.

In general, advisers suggested that Mr. Obama had prepared for a different Mitt
Romney, one who had promoted a conservative message to the Republican base this
year and chosen a running mate with a plan to cut deeply into government
spending. Instead, he was confronted by a candidate using a softer tone,
promising that he would provide plenty of money for education and saying that
his tax plan would not reduce the share of taxes paid by the wealthy.

Some of the weaknesses in the president's performance, advisers said, were the
result of a strategy of not turning off the narrow slice of swing voters, who
are often repelled by personal confrontations.

But none of it explained Mr. Obama's failure at times to defend himself against
Mr. Romney's attacks, or why Mr. Obama said, ''On Social Security, we've got a
somewhat similar position'' -- a statement that sent up a cheer at Mr. Romney's
campaign headquarters in Boston and bewildered Mr. Obama's advisers.

Mr. Romney's aides said they believed that the issue of Social Security -- which
Mr. Romney's running mate, Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, has called
for overhauling to include private investment accounts -- had been taken off the
table for Democratic candidates in the final month of the debate and could not
be effectively used as a weapon against Republicans.

Both sides agreed that the evening was likely to rejuvenate Mr. Romney's
fund-raising and send wealthy donors back to the ''super PACs'' that have been
supporting Mr. Romney all year. Before Wednesday the campaigns were watching
carefully for signs that the big money would move into House and Senate races as
some lost confidence in Mr. Romney's chances to win.

Aides said they were mostly relieved that Mr. Romney could get back on a solid,
offensive footing as he makes a case against Mr. Obama and, perhaps more
vitally, for himself. Romney advisers acknowledged that he was, as one said,
''refocusing the debate on certain components of his record'' for a broader fall
audience.

His conservative supporters indicated they were willing to abide by that
approach, for now. ''There was nothing there to give us great concern,'' Chris
Chocola, president of the Club for Growth, the influential conservative group,
said of Mr. Romney's debate rhetoric. ''But we'll be watching what he does if he
becomes the president.''

Mr. Obama's aides said if there was one silver lining in the night it was that
they could seize on what they called inconsistencies between Mr. Romney's
stances during the primaries and those of this late campaign period.

Mr. Obama's campaign made an early decision, however, to campaign against Mr.
Romney as a conservative, wary that attacking him as equivocal would create an
impression with more centrist independent voters that he did not truly hold the
right-leaning positions he espoused during the primaries. So several officials
suggested they would approach his new tone by suggesting he was not being honest
about his plans.

''He may win the Oscar for his performance last night, but he's not going to win
the presidency,'' Mr. Axelrod said. But, he conceded, what Mr. Obama really
needs to do is deliver a better debate effort when the two meet next, on Oct.
16, at Hofstra University in New York. ''It's like a playoff in sports,'' he
said. ''You evaluate after every contest and make adjustments.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/05/us/politics/for-obama-and-romney
-campaign-gains-new-intensity-in-debates-wake.html

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE DAY AFTER IN DENVER: President Obama followed up his debate
appearance with a rally in the city on Thursday while Mitt Romney greeted police
officers who led his motorcade to the airport. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUG MILLS/THE
NEW YORK TIMES
BRIAN SNYDER/REUTERS) (A1)
 President Obama seemed more energetic at a rally on Thursday in Denver than at
the debate. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
