
                              30 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday
                              RACING FINAL EDITION

MITT CONNECTS Scores on econ Obama wobbly in face of attacks

BYLINE: BY THOMAS M. DeFRANK in Denver and JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
With Celeste Katz

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1000 words


WITH HIS BACK against the wall, an aggressive Mitt Romney stood toe-to-toe with
President Obama during their first debate and landed several solid blows on the
sometimes-wobbly incumbent.

The two men squared off for the first time and battled over taxes, deficits and
the steps needed to create jobs in a sputtering economy, attacking each other's
plans with a mix of wonky math and tight, forced smiles.

Romney repeatedly sought to turn the contest into a referendum on the past four
years, while Obama sought to frame the election as a choice between two starkly
different approaches to government.

"Going forward with the status quo is not going to cut it with the American
people," Romney said.

"The question is not where we have been, but where we are going," Obama said.

Neither landed a knockout blow, but Romney appeared to draw more blood and may
have left the Denver debate stage with the momentum he needed to revive his
sagging campaign. "Look, I've been in business 25 years (and) I have no idea
what you're talking about," said Romney, defending his own fiscal plan before
pivoting into a broadside on Obama's stewardship over the nation's sluggish
economic recovery.

"You don't just pick the winners and losers - you pick the losers," Romney said.
"We know that the path we're taking is not working; it's time for a new path."

Obama mocked his Republican rival's seemingly sudden insistence that the GOP
economic plan would not include tax cuts for the rich.

"Well, for 18 months he's been running on this tax plan, and now, five weeks
before the election, he says his big, bold idea is 'never mind,' " said Obama,
who then poked fun at Romney's plan to help small businesses. "Donald Trump is a
'small business,' and I know Donald Trump doesn't like to think of himself as
small anything."

While Romney repeatedly went on the attack, Obama frequently seemed passive and
hesitant to interrupt, showing none of the feistiness he has displayed on the
campaign trail.

Indeed, in what, at times, was a duel over numbers, the President let several
potentially damning assertions by Romney go unchallenged: that household income
has fallen by an average of $4,000 during the last four years, that 23 million
Americans are out of work, and that the number of food stamp recipients has
risen to a record 46 million on Obama's watch.

Romney, however, refused to accept Obama's assertion about the Republican's
tax-cut proposal.

"I'm not looking for a $5 trillion tax cut," the ex-Massachusetts governor
bristled, one of several times he questioned Obama's claims about the Republican
plan.

"Mr. President, you're entitled to your own airplane and your own house," Romney
said, "but not your own facts."

The back-and-forth rarely grew heated, but the two men showed little warmth for
each other and frequently went on to make their points despite attempts by the
moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, to rein them in.

Romney even used the moderator as an example for a spending cut he would make if
elected. "I'm sorry, Jim, but I'm going to stop this subsidy to PBS. I like Big
Bird, I like you, too," Romney said.

Obama grew animated only twice, when defending his historic health care
legislation, and toward the end of the debate.

"I have become fond of this term, 'Obamacare,' " the President said - and cited
the plan Romney oversaw in Massachusetts as inspiration. He then ripped Romney
for not explaining the details for several of his plans - from tax policy to
health care - teasing that they were being kept secret "because they're too
good."

But throughout the debate, Obama inexplicably never mentioned the campaign's
most recent game-changer, the leaked fund-raising video in which Romney derided
the "47%" of Americans who he said rely on the government.

The policy-heavy, 90-minute debate included few of the much-ballyhooed zingers
but opened with a light moment, as Obama wished his wife -sitting in the
audience - a happy 20th anniversary. "A year from now, we will not be
celebrating it in front of 40 million people," joked Obama. Romney added his own
congratulations moments later.

The ramifications of the Rumble in the Rockies, the first of three debates
between Obama and Romney over 19 days, will likely be enormous as the race for
the White House enters the homestretch.

Several independent analysts said Romney turned in a solid performance -
although the effect on the election was not immediately clear. "This is going to
be a test of how much debates can change the polls. There's no real question
that Romney won the first debate," said Larry Sabato of the University of
Virginia.

"Obama left his A game at the White House, that's for sure. Most Democrats are
complaining bitterly on Twitter about how many opportunities Obama missed. But
it was a wonky debate, not scintillating. Will the debate matter? Are the
partisans just cheering for their side? We'll find out."

Romney entered the debate trailing slightly in the overall polls but by larger
margins in some of the crucial swing states that will decide the election. New
polls in three of swing states, released earlier Wednesday, showed Obama ahead.
He was up 1 percentage point in Florida, 2 points in Virginia and 8 points in
crucial Ohio, according to the NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist College
surveys.

Victories in two of those three states would all but assure Obama a second term
- which is why Republicans zeroed in on the debates as their best chances to
change the course of the race.

GOP strategists were ebullient in the moments after the debate ended.

"Obama was mailing it in," one said. "There was little left of the charisma and
magic he could bring to a stage in 2008."

The men at the top of their tickets will cede the spotlights to their running
mates next week. Vice President Biden and Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) will debate
next Thursday in Danville, Ky.

After that, Obama and Romney will face off two more times, including in a town
hall-style debate at Long Island's Hofstra University on Oct. 16.

jlemire@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Rumble in the Rockies on Wednesday night began debate season for the
two men who are vying to call the White House home. REUTERS JOE BIDEN AP PAUL
RYAN AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
