
                              34 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                                The Irish Times

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

Four years in Oval Office and never been dissed: Obama's wake-up call

BYLINE: LARA MARLOWE

SECTION: WORLD; US Elections ; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1042 words


ANALYSIS:Obama may have won on substance, but Romney beat him on tone

IT WILL take several days for the damage to President Barack Obama s re-election
campaign to be fully assessed. But as praise continued to pour in yesterday for
Mitt Romney s surprisingly good performance in Thursday night s presidential
debate, one question came up over and over. In the words of a caller to C-Span
radio s morning talk show: where was President Obama?

Within moments of the debate starting, it became obvious that the incumbent was
not in top form.

The split television screen showed Romney smiling as he watched Obama intently.
Only once, at the end of an hour and a half, when Romney made his closing
remarks, did Obama even look at him.

For most of the debate, Obama looked in the opposite direction, as if absent,
sometimes nodding incongruously or grinning at someone in the audience while
Romney berated his performance in office.

The most oft-heard explanation was that for nearly four years in the Oval
Office, no one has dared to challenge Obama.

The president often refers to the  bubble  that surrounds him; Romney burst it.
Even Bill Maher, the liberal comedian who donated $1 million to a pro-Obama
super-pac , joked:  I can t believe I m saying this, but Obama looks like he
does need a teleprompter.

Obama may have been the victim of incumbent syndrome. At least four times in
recent decades, presidents have botched their first debate against a challenger.

In 2004, the Democratic senator John Kerry   who prepared Obama for his dismal
debate   obliterated George W Bush in their first contest. Bush nonetheless went
on to win re-election.

Another theory is that Obama, whom Republicans often portray as an arrogant
elitist, had been coached to hide his contempt for Romney. He looked angry
during the debate, as if he were thinking: Why do I have to go through this
nonsense? How dare this man say such things?

Whatever the reason, Obama was not in a fighting mood. He was defensive and
never mentioned the topics hammered home in advertisements that gave him a lead
in the swing states: Romney s disdain for the 47 per cent of Americans who don t
pay federal income tax; his refusal to release more than two years of tax
records; alleged  vulture capitalism  at Bain, the private equity firm Romney
founded.

That lifetime of clean Mormon living appeared to pay off for Romney on Thursday
night. The vivacious, concentrated and competitive 64-year-old chipped away at
the tired, 51-year-old president.

Sixty-seven per cent of respondents in a post-debate CNN/ORC poll said Romney
won the debate; only 25 per cent said Obama did.

Obama struggled to convince viewers that the economy is improving.

Under the president s policies, middle-income Americans have been buried,
Romney said, exploiting vice-president

Joe Biden s latest gaffe.

They re just being crushed. Middle-income Americans have seen their income come
down by $4,300 . . . gasoline prices have doubled under the president.
Electricity rates are up. Food prices are up . . .

One of Romney s most vicious attacks focused on the Affordable Care Act:  I just
don t know how the president could have come into office, facing 23 million
people out of work, rising unemployment, an economic crisis at the kitchen table
and spent his energy and passion for two years fighting for Obamacare instead of
fighting for jobs for the American people.

There was an answer, but Obama didn t say it: that it s immoral to leave 50
million people without healthcare in the world s richest country; that the
private healthcare system Romney is so enamoured of is the most expensive and
one of the least efficient in the world, costing $2.6 trillion annually.

Four times Romney denied Obama s accusation that he wants to spend $5 trillion
on tax cuts, though that s the mathematical conclusion of his promise to cut
income tax by 20 per cent.

Look, I got five boys,  Romney said.  I m used to people saying something that s
not always true, but just keep repeating it and ultimately hoping I ll believe
it . . . That is not the case, all right? I will not reduce the taxes paid by
high-income Americans.

I will not, under any circumstances, raise taxes on middle-income families.

Obama wants to stop corporate tax exemptions for US companies who keep their
profits overseas.  You said you get a deduction for getting a plant overseas,
Romney said in one put-down.

Look, I ve been in business for 25 years. I have no idea what you re talking
about.  Obama didn t call him on it.

Romney used humour, joking about his  romantic  rendezvous with Obama on the
president s 20th wedding anniversary, warning the moderator he would have to
stop the subsidy for public broadcasting because although  I love Big Bird. I
actually like you too , and he refused  to borrow money from China to pay for it
.

Obama may have won on substance, but Romney defeated him in style and tone. It
was  unbalanced  for Romney to refuse even $1 of taxes for $10 in spending cuts,
Obama said.

Romney countered:  I m not going to raise taxes on anyone because when the
economy s growing slow like this, when we re in recession, you shouldn t raise
taxes on anyone . . . the revenue I get is by more people working, getting
higher pay, paying more taxes.

Obama made a legitimate point that Romney s plan to  voucherise  Medicare would
put seniors at the mercy of those insurance companies .

But Romney carried the argument again, asserting that  my experience is the
private sector typically is able to provide a better product at lower cost .

While Obama repeated tired lines from his stump speech, Romney invented a whole
new compassionate and moderate persona for himself. He carried out the
etch-a-sketch  transition from rabid right-winger in the primaries to reasonable
guy in the final sprint of the election so seamlessly that voters might not even
notice.

Who could have imagined that the hitherto wooden, plodding Romney would turn out
to be such a skilled prestidigitator, morphing his policies into a defence of
the middle class so similar to Obama s as to be unassailable?

At one point, Obama lashed out in frustration at the dearth of detail in Romney
s plans. It was, Romney insisted, a sign of his willingness to work with the
opposition.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                         Copyright 2012 The Irish Times
                              All Rights Reserved
