
                              4 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 3, 2012 Wednesday

BATTLING ON THE HOME FRONT;
Barack Obama attended debate camp. Mitt Romney has memorized his 'zingers.'
They're set to engage head-to-head for the first time in a live televised debate
from Denver. The discussion over domestic issues could change the trajectory of
the presidential race

BYLINE: KONRAD YAKABUSKI

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; FOLIO: PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 2044 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


If Mitt Romney had a dollar for every piece of debate advice he has received in
recent days, the Republican nominee would be a far richer man than he already
is.

The abundance of unsolicited pointers is illustrative of the make-or-break
proposition Mr. Romney faces as he takes on President Barack Obama in their
first presidential debate on Wednesday. The encounter at the University of
Denver could be one of the GOP hopeful's last chances to reverse the course of a
campaign that is steadily trending Mr. Obama's way.

As many as 60 million Americans are expected to tune in for the 90-minute debate
on domestic issues. Jim Lehrer of PBS, moderating his 12th presidential debate,
will lead the candidates through a discussion on the economy, health care and
the role of government.

Despite their differences on policy, Mr. Romney and Mr. Obama are similar
politicians. Both prefer to talk about facts and figures rather than about what
makes them tear up or tick. Both are studies in self-control who prefer written
scripts over spontaneity.

The debate could go to the candidate who most forces the other outside his
comfort zone.

*****

WHO HAS THE MOST TO GAIN OR LOSE?

Judging by the way each candidate and most of his surrogates have been
attempting to play down debate expectations in recent days, neither Mr. Romney
nor Mr. Obama wants to be seen as the favourite. In a debate without major
blunders by either, a candidate's failure to live up to expectations could make
some voters rethink their support.

"Governor Romney, he's a good debater. I'm just okay," Mr. Obama mused at a
campaign rally on Sunday before holing up for intensive "debate camp" in
suburban Las Vegas, where Democratic Senator John Kerry has played Mr. Romney in
practice sessions.

In reality, far more voters are betting on Mr. Obama than on his rival to win
the debate. In a Pew Research Center poll released Monday, fully 51 per cent of
voters picked the President to "do a better job" in the debate. Only 29 per cent
picked Mr. Romney to win. A Quinnipiac University poll released Tuesday showed a
similar result, with 54 per cent picking Mr. Obama to prevail; Mr. Romney was
chosen to win by only 28 per cent.

As a result, Mr. Obama has more to lose going into the first debate. He is
already ahead in the polls in almost every critical swing state. But as much as
that gives him an incentive to play it safe in the debate - sticking to his
prepared script regardless of the questions or Mr. Romney's attacks - he must
also ensure he lives up to voter expectations.

"Because he tends to be behind, Mitt Romney has more to gain from the debates,"
explained William Benoit, a communications professor and debate expert at Ohio
University. Mr. Romney failed to get any momentum from what his campaign hoped
would be the first two "pivot points" of the race - choosing his
vice-presidential running mate and making a memorable convention speech. That
means the first debate, traditionally the most watched of the three, has taken
on added urgency for him.

Mr. Romney has an incentive to take more risks, and be more aggressive, than Mr.
Obama. The Republican nominee has had plenty of formal debate preparation in
recent months - Ohio Senator Rob Portman has played Mr. Obama in those practice
sessions - and aides have indicated he has prepared "a series of zingers" to
attack Mr. Obama.

Still, the Romney campaign has played down New Jersey Republican Governor Chris
Christie's Sunday comment, according to which the debate would "change the
entire narrative of this race." Why set expectations you are not sure you can
meet?

*****

WHAT ARE THEIR STRENGTHS AND VULNERABILITIES?

With one debate line in 2008 - "You're likeable enough, Hillary" - Mr. Obama
exposed one of his biggest weaknesses. He can come off as smug, never more so
than when he is debating someone he does not particularly like. And he
reportedly likes Mr. Romney even less than Hillary Clinton, his rival for the
Democratic nomination in 2008.

Mr. Romney could try to provoke outbursts of condescension from Mr. Obama, who
is still considered the more likeable of the two by voters. That is why
Democratic strategist Hilary Rosen, writing on CNN.com, had this advice for Mr.
Obama: "Stay nice. No 'You're likeable enough' comments; no jokes about dogs on
top of the car; no snarking about how rich Romney is; no patronizing lectures
when he has his facts wrong."

That may be a tall order for the President. On the campaign trail, he has
repeatedly ridiculed Mr. Romney for once driving to Canada with his Irish setter
strapped to the car roof, harped about his rival's wealth and berated the GOP
nominee for playing loose with the facts.

Still, Mr. Obama has an opportunity to solidify the narrative about Mr. Romney
as a profit-driven corporate raider. He could slip in references to his
controversial record at private equity firm Bain Capital and the emergence of a
video in which the GOP nominee slams the 47 per cent of Americans who do not pay
income taxes.

Mr. Obama's biggest challenge will be avoiding putting voters to sleep. He tends
to give long, windy replies where short, snappy ones would help him make his
point better.

"If Mr. Obama faces any risk in this debate it is taking the bait - slipping
back and trying to persuade voters that his first term was successful and the
U.S. is on the right track," Stanley Greenberg, a former presidential debate
coach to Bill Clinton and Al Gore, wrote in the Financial Times.

Indeed, Mr. Romney will try to put the President on the defensive. But the GOP
nominee must also avoid having to defend his past comments or record, and
instead focus on what he intends to do to get the economy moving. Or as Mr.
Greenberg put it: "Lay off the welfare state and lay out bold conservative
policies to boost business and jobs."

Though he is stiff on the campaign trail, Mr. Romney was effective during the
Republican primary debates, making short shrift of Rick Perry and Newt Gingrich
when he needed to. As long as he executed the plan he and his debate coaches
laid out in practice, Mr. Romney did well. But his spontaneous remarks, such as
challenging Mr. Perry to a $10,000 bet, got him in trouble.

"Mr. Obama and Mr. Romney are both better when they're on script. Neither of
these guys is particularly good in the moment," noted Allan Louden, chair of the
communications department at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C. "That
could make for a rather staid debate. But my guess is that each is going to try
to get the other to go off script for that reason."

*****

WHAT IS THE POTENTIAL IMPACT ON THE RACE?

Given the personalities and debating styles of each of the candidates, most
pundits are not expecting the Obama-Romney encounters to go down as classics.
After all, almost no one remembers Mr. Obama's duels with John McCain in 2008.
Pundits may pine for a major blunder - such as Gerald Ford's denial of Soviet
domination of Eastern Europe in 1976 or Mike Dukakis's impassive 1988 reply to
question involving his wife's hypothetical rape and murder. They should not hold
their breath.

"The likelihood that campaigners with this much experience will make huge gaffes
is probably very low," Ohio University's Prof. Benoit said. "But you don't need
to change attitudes toward one candidate to prevail. You just need to strengthen
existing attitudes, making people more likely to vote for you and donate to your
campaign. And the first debate usually has a greater effect than the others in
this regard."

Still, unless Mr. Romney is an obvious loser, he could benefit from the media's
desire to depict the contest as a horse race. That is why many Democrats are
already warning against the post-debate spin that declares Mr. Romney the
winner.

Indeed, winning the post-debate spin cycle has become as critical as winning the
debate itself. Mr. Gore discovered that in 2000. The depiction of his
performance as full of "sighs and lies" stuck even though overnight polls after
the first debate suggested the Democratic nominee was the winner. Mr. Gore went
into the debates five percentage points ahead of Mr. Bush but slipped five
points behind his Republican rival after the encounters.

If there is an obvious loser on Wednesday night, Prof. Louden suggested he will
be able to take consolation in the fact that, in a multi-platform media world,
debates may be declining in importance: "Unless something dramatic happens, the
afterlife of any debate has been shortened by all the [media] competition."

*****

MEMORABLE DEBATE MOMENTS

1960

Senator John F. Kennedy versus Vice-President Richard M. Nixon

U.S. presidential politics entered a new era when Senator John F. Kennedy and
Vice-President Richard M. Nixon met in the first-ever televised presidential
debate on Sept. 26, 1960. Mr. Nixon appeared pale as a result of a recent
hospitalization; his suit matched the wall paint. The camera showed him sweating
under the hot lights. Mr. Kennedy's closing statement leaves an impression of
youth, confidence, vision and an intuitive understanding of how to use the
camera and reach the many millions who knew little about the senator from
Massachusetts.

1984

President Ronald Reagan versus Walter Mondale

A question from a journalist at the second presidential debate between Ronald
Reagan and Walter Mondale produced one of the most memorable debate moments. At
73 years old, President Reagan was the oldest president in history. "President
Kennedy had to go days on end [on] very little sleep during the Cuba missile
crisis. Is there any doubt in your mind that you would be able to function in
such circumstances?" asked the journalist. President Reagan turned the question
on his 56-year-old challenger, Walter Mondale: "I am not going to exploit, for
political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience," he said. Mr. Mondale
laughed heartily but years later admitted that when he walked off the stage that
night, he knew the campaign was over.

1992

President George H. W. Bush versus Governor Bill Clinton

The oft-cited moment during the 1992 presidential debates took less than three
seconds - when President George H. W. Bush looked at his wristwatch during a
town-hall debate just as an audience member started asking a question. The
President came across, in that moment, as disinterested - not the takeaway a
President wishes for when the country's economy is struggling and millions of
Americans are suffering. Later, each candidate was asked to answer how the
country's financial and debt woes had affected them personally. President Bush
struggled to understand the question. Bill Clinton, on the other hand, walked
toward the audience member, asked follow-up questions, kept up eye contact with
the questioner in an answer that exuded empathy. It was a master-class - and
when the camera cut to President Bush, he looked almost dumbstruck.

2000

Vice-President Al Gore versus Governor George W. Bush

Vice-President Al Gore sighed and rolled his eyes during George W. Bush's
answers during the televised presidential debates. But perhaps the strangest
moment took place when Mr. Gore stepped off his stool, took several steps in Mr.
Bush's direction and then stopped. The Texas governor paused mid-sentence - and
nodded to Mr. Gore. The audience laughed. It was an awkward moment that did
little to endear Mr. Gore to the town-hall audience or the viewers at home.

2004

President George W. Bush versus Senator John Kerry

Senator John Kerry was widely seen as an effective debater. But it was President
George W. Bush's spontaneous and off-the-cuff responses - and his prevalent
scowling and seething - that debate watchers remembered. During the second
presidential debate, and with the Iraq war a major campaign issue, Senator Kerry
talked about building coalitions rather than going it alone. When the moderator
tried to move the conversation on to the next question, President Bush refused,
talking over the moderator and launching in to an impassioned counter-attack:
"You've got 30 countries there," President Bush said, referring to the group of
countries with troops in Iraq. "It denigrates an alliance to say we're going
alone, to discount their sacrifices."

Affan Chowdhry

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
