
                              39 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                       San Jose Mercury News (California)

                           October 3, 2012 Wednesday


BYLINE: By Karen E. Crummy, Denver Post

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1320 words


President Barack Obama and Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney face-off
at the first presidential debate Wednesday - an important moment for both
candidates, but especially critical for Romney.

Presidential debates tend to reinforce, rather than sway, voter opinions. But in
some instances, they can affect the dynamics of a race, boost voter enthusiasm
and provide a candidate an opening for a comeback.

That is exactly what Romney needs.

After failing to gain traction from the GOP convention, Romney hurled himself
into a turbulent month marked by campaign blunders and contradictory messages,
leaving his campaign in constant "reboot" mode. Now, as he moves into the final
weeks of the campaign, his path to the White House is narrowing as he faces
anemic poll numbers in key swing states, such as Florida and Ohio - a state no
Republican has ever lost and won the presidency.

Despite Obama's mediocre job approval numbers and his vulnerability on the
economy and jobs - consistently cited by voters as the most important election
issue - Romney's economic message hasn't resonated with a majority of voters,
including those in the middle class. Recent polls show the former head of Bain
Capital has lost his edge on who voters trust to handle the economy. Add on
agender gap, high unfavorability ratings and and voters' perception that he
isn't like them and Romney has some ground to make up.

"It's Romney's last best chance to turn things around," said Republican
strategist Mark McKinnon, a former adviser to President George W. Bush. "He'll
have to exceed expectations by a lot. He needs to have a moment that gets people
to view him differently. And he needs to articulate some ideas that people think
are credible on the economy. He needs to appeal across the board."

With early voting already underway in some states such as Iowa and Ohio, and
other critical swing states kicking off voting over the next two weeks, the
first presidential debate is widely viewed as both candidates' best chance at
reaching the public.

Michael McDonald, an election expert at George Mason University, predicts this
year 35 percent of the presidential votes will be cast before Election Day.

The event's hype has led Obama's advisers to downplay expectations, noting that
the president' s busy schedule has not allowed for enough debate practice.
Romney's campaign and surrogates, however, are covering all their bases,
simultaneously playing up Romney's abilities while tamping down expectations.

With estimates that more than 50 million people will watch the debate in an
attempt to get answers to their questions about the economy, health care and the
role of government, it is unlikely that either candidate won't be ready for
prime time. But what they do with that time is critical.

"Obama's task is like being on a football team with a lead. Put in the defensive
backs and don't make any mistakes," said Dan Schnur, director of the Jesse M.
Unruh Institute of Politics at the University of Southern California and former
adviser to U.S. Sen. John McCain during his 2000 presidential primary run. "
Romney has to throw the ball, but it's not time yet for a Hail Mary. He has to
consistently move the ball down the field."

As the incumbent president, Obama needs to play defense without looking
defensive, said Schnur. And he should remind people why they like him, note the
promises that he kept and attempt to gingerly place the blame at the feet of the
U.S. Congress for those campaign vows he broke, said Boston-based Democratic
strategist Mary Anne Marsh.

While he needs to play it a bit safe - he's only narrowly ahead of Romney in
national polls - he also needs to go on the attack, painting Romney's positions
as nearly identical to those of President George W. Bush, which "contributed to
the mess today," she said. And expect to hear more than once a reference to
Romney's comments suggesting that 47 percent of Americans were dependent on
government and viewed themselves as victims.

"Whenever he can, the president will say 'I represent all of America,' forcing
Gov. Romney back on his heels," she said.Obama, however, also needs to remain
engaged, give short answers and avoid lecturing as if he is teaching a
constitutional law class.

"The president is not a terrific debater. The format of short answers does not
lend itself well to his skills," said David Birdsell, dean of the School of
Public Affairs at Baruch College in New York, who has written a book on
presidential debates. "He has a tendency to appear supercilious, and use a tone
that is condescending - especially when he starts a sentence with 'um, look.'
The president a needs to avoid looking smug, out-of-touch and arrogant."

During a 2008 Democratic primary debate against opponent Hillary Rodham Clinton,
Obama somewhat callously referred to her as"likable enough."

And appearing tired and irritated during a recent "60 Minutes" interview, the
president referred to the instability in the Middle East as "bumps in the road."

Romney's hurdle is that he needs to out-perform the president and give voters a
reason to both reject Obama and embrace him, strategists and political observers
say. That means Romney must accomplish a number things in 90-minutes: be
relatable, likeable, offer specific policy details he has not disclosed in the
past, aggressively - but respectfully - hit the president on his record, and try
to squeeze in a memorable line or funny zinger.

While there are very few undecided voters left, there are always those who are
weakly committed - crucial in a tight race like this, said Mitchell McKinney, a
political communications specialist at the University of Missouri.

"We call them persuadables. They still aren't completely comfortable with their
choice," he said. "It's a chance for Romney to get his message across and
re-re-introduce himself."

That message should avoid "Republican ideological code words" on the economy
such as "free market, self-reliance and downsize government" because they often
turn off moderate voters, said Bruce Buchanan, a presidential politics expert at
the University of Texas.

And Romney should add some meat to his economic plan, which includes cutting
taxes on the wealthy and the middle class, slashing regulations negatively
impacting businesses, expanding trade, balancing the budget, and promoting
domestic energy independence.

"He certainly doesn't need to spew off 57 specific proposals, but he needs to
paint a compelling vision of a better future and give voters confidence that his
plan is better than Barack Obama's," said Republican pollster Whit Ayres.

Romney has some advantages. He has been preparing for the debates since June,
and challengers tend to gain immediate stature by appearing on stage next to the
incumbent. And while he hasn't participated in a one-on-one debate, he holds the
record for debate attendance among general-election candidates since he ran in
both 2008 and 2012, McKinney said. During his match-ups against Newt Gingrich,
Romney proved he could be aggressive, even accusing the former House Speaker of
"influence peddling."

"He's a very good technical debater. He doesn't make substantial errors," said
Brett O'Donnell, GOP communications strategist and debate adviser to Romney
during the primary. " His weakness is that when he gets defensive, he tends to
looks bad."

During a GOP primary debate, Romney went off-script and offered a$10,000 wager
to Texas Gov. Rick Perry. That reinforced some opinions that Romney was
out-of-touch.

While there is much at stake, and viewers can expect a good video bite to emerge
in the aftermath and perhaps information to help them make an educated decision
on who to vote for, most political observers agree that this debate will not
miraculously change the race overnight.

"Super Bowl moments don't happen in debates," Schnur said. "If you are looking
for a single, magical, transformative moment, you might be let down."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Workers walk outside the Magness Arena at the Daniel L. Ritchie Center
for Sports and Wellness, site of Wednesday's presidential debate, on the campus
of the University of Denver, Monday, Oct. 1, 2012, in Denver. (AP Photo/Charlie
Neibergall)
A worker labels chairs in the Magness Arena at the Daniel L. Ritchie Center for
Sports and Wellness, site of Wednesday's presidential debate, on the campus of
the University of Denver, Tuesday, Oct. 2, 2012, in Denver. (AP Photo/Charlie
Neibergall)
Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, left, who is the debate practice partner for
Republican presidential candidate, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, takes
a picture for well-wishers after the both of them made an unscheduled stop at a
Chipotle restaurant in Denver, Tuesday, Oct. 2, 2012. (AP Photo/Charles
Dharapak)
Stand-ins for Republican presidential candidate, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney, left, and President Barack Obama, shake hands on stage during a
rehearsal for a debate at the University of Denver ,Tuesday, Oct. 2, 2012, in
Denver. President Barack Obama and Republican presidential candidate and former
Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney will hold their first debate Wednesday. (AP
Photo/David Goldman)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 San Jose Mercury News
                              All Rights Reserved
