
                              40 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                     Hendricks County Flyer (Avon, Indiana)

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

First presidential debate may have turned the tides

BYLINE: Kathy Linton, Hendricks County Flyer, Avon, Ind.

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 1032 words


Oct. 04--TV viewers across the nation Wednesday night saw what most are calling
an "upset victory" in the first of three presidential debates.

President Barack Obama and challenger GOP nominee Gov. Mitt Romney debated at
the Ritchie Center on the campus of the University of Denver. The 90-minute
debate was moderated by Jim Lehrer of the "PBS NewsHour."

Going into the debate, polls showed the candidates to be fairly tied in the race
for the White House. A National Journal poll showed both Romney and Obama tied
at 47 percent with prospective voters and a Rasmussen Reports poll showed Romney
at 47 percent and Obama at 48 percent.

While new polling results on the actual race had not been released as of press
time, a CNN poll released late Wednesday night showed that 67 percent of
registered voters who watched the debate said Romney had won the debate, while
25 percent said Obama had won.

Most everyone agrees that the debate brought a twist to the race, and clearly
showed the different roads each man would take as president.

The biggest clashes came in discussions of the health care reform act, which
Obama defended and Romney referred to as "an unnecessary and unwanted government
takeover of health care," and the Dodd-Frank Act, which Obama again defended and
Romney said was an overreach of government interference in business.

Romney did say that there were some measures in both the health care and
business acts that he would retain in his own proposals.

Obama said Romney's proposals were too vague and said, "At some point, the
American people have to ask themselves if the reason that Governor Romney is
keeping all these plans secret is because they're too good."

Romney explained many of his proposals during the debate and said, if elected,
he planned to work with both Republicans and Democrats and that he realizes that
all of his plans will not go through exactly as he'd like to see them. He said
the only way to get things done is to compromise.

When discussing education, Obama at one point accused Romney of not caring about
teachers or education. Romney chuckled at the accusation and responded that
Massachusetts, which he had governed, was rated the number one state in
education.

Another point of contention was in funding for the military. Romney said it is
paramount that America retain a strong military and Obama said the military
budget must be cut as a matter of "simple math."

Not surprisingly, Hendricks County's political leaders have very different takes
on the outcome of the debate.

"I did watch the whole debate," Hendricks County Democrat chair Charlotte Martin
said. "I felt like we had wanted Obama to explain what he has done in his four
years and what he will do in the next four. I felt he did a very good job of
explaining that to the American people."

Martin said Democrats are "very proud" of what the president has accomplished.

"We know there are many more things he has to do in his next term, if the
American people will just follow along and allow him to," she said. "It took
eight years to get to this point and it might take another eight to get us out
of it. But I do feel that the housing problem is improving, the economy is
picking up, Wall Street and the banking industry are back on track.

"The other thing that I think, and it did not come out last night, is that Obama
is much more prepared for our foreign policy than Romney will be. I'm sure that
that will be in the next debate. He and Hillary Clinton are much more prepared
and are doing a good job of working with our foreign friends, so hopefully we
can have more peace with the other countries than we have had."

Martin said she has heard Romney being praised for his performance in the
debate, but she sees it differently.

"I know a lot of people say that Romney came on very strong and that the
president was probably not as forceful," she said. "He was not trying to
overpower Mitt Romney -- he was trying to give the facts. I don't feel like he
needed to press the points any more than what he did. I think all of his numbers
and his statements speak for themselves. With the health care measures, the
military ... we did see what he has done and will do. Our country needs to move
in an upward direction, not down. What we need to do is go forward and not go
backwards."

Martin said in the next debates she'd like to see more discussion on health care
and education.

"I'm really worried about Mitt Romney's stance on women," she said. "My other
issue is, of course, education. I'm a retired teacher after 31 years in Georgia.
Education is very important. I see the Republicans going toward vouchers,
charter schools, and that is the wrong direction for America to take in
education."

Todd Singer, chairman of the Hendricks County Libertarian party, said he didn't
watch the debate.

"Unfortunately, I didn't, so I can't comment with anything that isn't
secondhand," he said. "Part of the reason I didn't watch is that Gary Johnson
(the Libertarian candidate for president) wasn't included. I thought he should
have been included."

Hendricks County Republican Party Chairman Mike O'Brien deemed the debate a
success.

"Romney was the clear winner," O'Brien said. "You can flip open the opinion page
of any newspaper in the country to confirm it.

"If you're a voter who's been on the fence about Romney's chances in this race,
you couldn't help but think last night, 'where has this Mitt Romney been?' He
was poised, confident, and presented a clear and detailed alternative to the
current regime.

"The president, having his record laid out in front of him, was
uncharacteristically rattled and had no response. He spent most of his time
ignoring the past four years and dismissed our current problems as those he
inherited and was hopelessly unable to change. Voters aren't buying it."

Obama and Romney are scheduled to debate again Oct. 16 in New York and Oct. 22
in Florida. Vice President Joe Biden and Romney's running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan
of Wisconsin, are scheduled to debate Oct. 11 in Kentucky.

kathy.linton@flyergroup.com

___ (c)2012 the Hendricks County Flyer (Avon, Ind.) Visit the Hendricks County
Flyer (Avon, Ind.) at www.flyergroup.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121004-FX-First-presidential-debate
-may-have-turned-the-tides-1004-20121004

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FX


                     Copyright 2012 Hendricks County Flyer
