
                              42 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                              The Bismarck Tribune

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Obama, Romney clash on economy in first debate

SECTION: WIRE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1297 words


Obama, Romney clash on economy in first debate

By JULIE PACE and DAVID ESPO

Associated Press

DENVER (AP) - In a showdown at close quarters, President Barack Obama and
Republican Mitt Romney sparred aggressively in their first campaign debate
Wednesday night over taxes, deficits and strong steps needed to create jobs in a
sputtering national economy. "The status quo is not going to cut it," declared
the challenger.

Obama in turn accused his rival of seeking to "double down" on economic policies
that actually led to the devastating national downturn four years ago - and of
evasiveness when it came to prescriptions for tax changes, health care, Wall
Street regulation and more.

The economy dominated the evening, as it has the race for the White House all
year. Pre-debate opinion polls showed Obama with a slight advantage in key
battleground states and nationally.

With early voting already under way in dozens of states, Romney was particularly
aggressive in the 90-minute event that drew a television audience likely to be
counted in the tens of millions - like a man looking to shake up the campaign
with a little less than five weeks to run.

The former Massachusetts governor virtually lectured Obama at one point after
the president accused him of seeking to cut education funds. "Mr. President,
you're entitled to your own airplane and your own house, but not your own
facts," he said.

Romney said he had plans to fix the economy, overhaul the tax code, repeal
Obama's health care plan and replace with a better alternative, remake Medicare,
pass a substitute for the legislation designed to prevent another financial
crash and reduce deficits - but he provided no new specifics despite Obama's
prodding.

Said Obama: "At some point the American people have to ask themselves: Is the
reason Governor Romney is keeping all these plans secret, is it because they're
going to be too good? Because middle class families benefit too much? No."

The two men debate twice more this month, but they were first going their
separate ways on Thursday. Obama had campaign stops in Colorado and then
Madison, Wis., while Romney was booked into Virginia. All three states are among
the nine battlegrounds likely to settle the race.

At times the debate turned into rapid-fire charges and retorts that drew on
dense facts and figures that were difficult to follow. The men argued over oil
industry subsidies, federal spending as a percentage of the GDP, Medicare cuts,
taxes and small businesses and the size of the federal deficit and how it grew.

Obama sometimes seemed somewhat professorial. Romney was more assertive and
didn't hesitate to interrupt the president or moderator Jim Lehrer.

Despite the wonky tone of the debate, Romney managed to make some points by
personalizing his comments with recollections of people he said he had met on
the campaign trail. In another folksy reference, Romney told Lehrer, a veteran
of the Public Broadcasting Service, that he would stop the federal subsidy to
PBS even though "I love Big Bird."

Generally polite but pointed, the two men agreed about little if anything.

Obama said his opponent's plan to reduce all tax rates by 20 percent would cost
$5 trillion and benefit the wealthy at the expense of middle income taxpayers.

Shot back Romney: "Virtually everything he just said about my tax plan is
inaccurate."

The former Massachusetts governor and businessman added that Obama's proposal to
allow the expiration of tax cuts on upper-level income would mean tax increases
on small businesses that create jobs by the hundreds of thousands.

The two campaign rivals clasped hands and smiled as they strode onto the debate
stage at the University of Denver, then waved to the audience before taking
their places behind identical lecterns.

There was a quick moment of laughter, when Obama referred to first lady Michelle
Obama as "sweetie" and noted it was their 20th anniversary.

Romney added best wishes, and said to the first couple, "I'm sure this is the
most romantic place you could imagine, here with me."

Both candidates' wives were in the audience.

Without saying so, the two rivals quickly got to the crux of their race -
Romney's eagerness to turn the contest into a referendum on the past four years
while the incumbent desires for voters to choose between his plan for the next
four years and the one his rival backs.

Romney ticked off the dreary economic facts of life - a sharp spike in food
stamps, economic growth "lower this year than last" and "23 million people out
of work or stropped looking for work."

But Obama criticized Romney's prescriptions and his refusal to raise taxes and
said, "if you take such an unbalanced approach then that means you are going to
be gutting our investment in schools and education ... health care for seniors
in nursing homes (and) for kids with disabilities."

Not surprisingly, the two men disagreed over Medicare, a flash point since
Romney placed Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan on his ticket.

The president repeatedly described Romney's plan as a "voucher program" that
would raise out-of-pocket costs on seniors.

He continued, directly addressing the voters at home: "If you're 54 or 55 you
might want to listen because this will affect you."

Romney said he doesn't support any changes for current retirees or those close
to retirement.

"If you're 60 or 60 and older you don't need to listen further," he said, but he
contended that fundamental changes are needed to prevent the system from
becoming insolvent as millions of baby boom generation Americans become
eligible.

Romney also made a detailed case for repealing Obamacare, the name attached to
the health care plan that Obama pushed through Congress in 2010. "It has killed
jobs," he said, and argued that the best approach is to "do what we did in my
state."

Though he didn't say so, when he was governor Massachusetts passed legislation
that required residents to purchase coverage - the so-called individual mandate
that conservatives and he oppose on a national level.

Romney also said that Obamacare would cut $716 billion from Medicare over the
next decade.

The president said the changes were part of a plan to lengthen the program's
life, and he added that AARP, the seniors lobby, supports it.

With a two-minute closing statement, Obama said he had spent his first four
years in office fighting for those in the emiddle class and those seeking to
make it there. "If you'll vote for me, I'll fight just as hard in my second
term," he said.

Romney was as critical of Obama's tenure as he was the moment the two men walked
onto the stage.

If the president is re-elected, he predicted continued economic trouble for the
middle class, chronic unemployment, higher costs for health insurance and
"dramatic cuts to the military."

Obama took office in the shadow of an economic crisis but promised a turnaround
that hasn't materialized. Economic growth has been sluggish throughout his term,
with unemployment above 8 percent since before he took office.

The customary security blended with a festival-like atmosphere in the
surrounding area on a warm and sunny day. The Lumineers performed for free, and
Black Eyed Peas frontman will.i.am delivered a pep talk of sorts to Obama's
supporters. School officials arranged to show the debate on monitors outside the
hall for those without tickets.

There was local political theater, too, including female Romney supporters
wearing short shorts and holding signs that said, "What War On Women?" - a
rebuttal to claims by Obama and the Democrats.

The two presidential rivals also are scheduled to debate on Oct. 16 in
Hempstead, N.Y., and Oct. 22 in Boca Raton, Fla.

Vice President Joe Biden and Republican Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin have one
debate, Oct. 11 in Danville, Ky. Both men have already begun holding practice
sessions.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2012 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises
                              All Rights Reserved
