
                              46 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

If Mitt Romney won the debate, will he win the election?

BYLINE: Harry Entenguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 1038 words

ABSTRACT

Harry J Enten: With so few undecided voters, most not watching, a sole debate
can't change the game. But Obama's poll lead is perilously slim

FULL TEXT

It's fairly clear that Mitt Romney "won" Wednesday night's debate against
President Obama. Not only did he win a CNN insta-poll by a record breaking 67%
to 25% margin, but the press is also giving him a huge win. So what does all of
this mean for the race for president?

Romney gains on an increasingly vulnerable Obama, but the president still leads.

First, general election debates are not primary debates. If you took a polling
chart of the 2012 Republican primary, it would look like a w's and m's.
Candidate preferences were so flexible that Herman Cain - a man never elected to
political office who would leave the campaign because of a sexual harassment
charge - led the contest a year ago. The reason Cain took the lead was because
he looked good in the debates. When policy differences are small, as they are in
primaries, personality matters.

Personality isn't anywhere near as important in general elections. Voters can
decide on the issues because there are true substantive differences. That's why
most voters have already locked in their choice. President Obama has seemingly
held a small, but consistent lead most of this election.

We cannot expect that this or any one debate will turn an Obama edge into a
large Romney lead. Romney is down by about 3 percentage points in the Real Clear
Politics average. Only 5% of the electorate is truly undecided. Most of these
undecided voters weren't watching the debate and probably won't make their
choice until election day.

Second, history tells us that debates probably matter under certain
circumstances. Thomas Holbrook crunched the numbers since 1988 and found that
the margin between the two leading candidates changed by an average of about 4
percentage points between before the first and after the last debate. The margin
between Romney and Obama was less than that heading into Wednesday night's
debate.

Now, it's awfully difficult to figure out whether it's a debate that is moving
polling data or some other event(s) over the course of the debates season. Obama
, for instance, gained ground over John McCain in 2008 partly because of the
debates, but more because of a financial crisis from which we still haven't
fully recovered.

Candidates seem to gain when they were already gaining before the debate or when
they are underperforming the "fundamentals". Bush picked up steam in the 1988
debates - ,continuing his rise pre-debates. Bob Dole was vastly underperforming
the fundamentals in 1996: he should have been showing behind, but not by 20
points. So, it was not a huge surprise that his polling numbers improved after
the debates.

That's why I think Mitt Romney will make up some ground. Though the 5% of
undecided voters may be unreachable, there's another 5% of "soft" support. Many
of these had been leaning towards Obama or saying they were "undecided" since
the conventions: Obama's one-time 1.5-point edge among likely voters doubled or
even close to tripled at times during the last few weeks. Those voters are
likely to come home to Romney. If they don't, they likely never will.

Romney's also underperforming Jacob Montgomery et al's ensemble forecast from
all the fundamental models. These models take into everything from the economy
to incumbency to primary season performance. The ensemble has Romney losing, but
only by 0.6 percentage points.

Another plus for Romney is that he looked to have been picking up a little steam
before the debates began. Obama's lead in the Real Clear average has shrunk from
a lead close to 4.5 points back down to 3.

Third, underlying voter sentiment may not change, but enthusiasm probably will
and that could change polls. You can go on Twitter and see dejection among many
Democrats. Many likely voter models rely upon some level of voter interest or
enthusiasm in the election. During the 2000 campaign, Gallup's likely voter
model went absolutely bonkers because of enthusiasm differences. One day,
Republican enthusiasm was up because of the debates and the next, Democratic
excitement went through the roof.

The registered voter numbers, however, didn't move anywhere near as much. With
Republicans potentially gaining back the enthusiasm edge they held earlier in
the cycle, don't be surprised if an already ridiculously wide likely/registered
voter gap actually expands.

Fourth, and most importantly, any president whose approval rating is less than
his disapproval rating remains vulnerable. This, folks, is a key point and
remains tied to point four. If you read Real Clear Politics, you'll notice that
many polls that ask about the president's approval are among adults or
registered voters. Those polls are fine when enthusiasm ratings between
Democrats and Republicans are near equal. They are not an accurate
representation of the electorate if Republicans make a surprisingly large share
of the voters come November.

I would not be surprised if a likely voter model average at this point had
Obama's approval rating below his disapproval, given the large likely
voter/registered voter gap. That's a problem for Obama because no president has
won re-election with an approval rating below 50% among the voting (a smaller
group than adult) electorate.

The question, then, is whether or not Romney can yank up his favorable rating
above his unfavorable. If he can't, Obama's going to win. You don't trade in the
bad steak that doesn't make you ill for a bad steak that may give you food
poisoning. If Romney can present himself as a viable alternative, then a lot of
us might be surprised by the final result.

At this point, however, my belief is that we'll return somewhere close to where
we were before the conventions: a small Obama lead of about 1.5 points. There
just aren't that many minds that Romney can change at this point. Democrats can
also take heart that Republican excitement eventually rebounded a few weeks
following President Bush's 2004 debate debacle.

Still, my confidence in an Obama victory is at least somewhat shaken right now.
Obama's lead is probably not big enough for him to play the super-cautious game
he did on Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
