
                              47 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

MITT CONNECTS Scores on econ Obama wobbly in face of attacks

BYLINE: BY THOMAS M. DeFRANK in Denver and JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
With Celeste Katz

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 981 words


WITH HIS BACK against the wall, Mitt Romney went on the offensive in his first
debate with President Obama, delivering an unexpectedly strong performance that
may have given badly-needed momentum to his struggling campaign.

For 90 minutes Wednesday night, the two men battled over taxes, deficits and
steps needed to create jobs in a sluggish economy, attacking each other's plans
with a mix of wonky math and tight, forced smiles.

Romney repeatedly sought to turn the contest into a referendum on the past four
years, saying that Obama's policies have "crushed" the middle class.

"Going forward with the status quo is not going to cut it with the American
people," said Romney. "We know that the path we're taking is not working," he
said later. "It's time for a new path."

Obama framed the election as a choice between two starkly different approaches
to government.

"The question is not where we have been, but where we are going," the President
said.

"Are we going to double down on the top-down economic policies that helped to
get us into this mess, or do we embrace a new economic patriotism that says,
'America does best when the middle class does best?' "

The back-and-forth rarely grew heated but the two men showed little warmth for
each other and frequently went on to make their points despite attempts by the
moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, to rein them in.

Romney even used Lehrer as an example for a spending cut he would make if
elected.

"I'm sorry Jim, but I'm going to stop this subsidy to PBS. I love Big Bird! I
actually like you, too," Romney said.

Expectations were high for Obama heading into the debate, held in a Denver
auditorium. By a nearly 2-to-1 margin, Americans expected him to prevail,
according to predebate polls.

But it was Obama's first debate since the 2008 presidential race, while Romney
had debated 19 times during the Republican primaries.

At times, the differences showed.

While Romney repeatedly went on the offensive, Obama often seemed passive and
hesitant to interrupt - showing none of the feistiness he has displayed on the
campaign trail.

In what was often a numbing duel over numbers, the President let some
potentially damning Romney assertions go unchallenged: That household income has
fallen by an average of $4,000 since 2008; that 23 million Americans are out of
work, and that the number of food stamp recipients has risen to a record 46
million.

And throughout the debate, Obama inexplicably never mentioned the campaign's
recent game-changer, the fund-raising secret video in which Romney derided the
"47%" of Americans who rely on the government. Romney, however, refused to
accept Obama's claim about the Republican's tax-cut proposal.

"I'm not looking for a $5 trillion tax cut," the ex-Massachusetts governor
bristled.

"Mr. President, you're entitled to your own airplane and your own house," Romney
added, "but not your own facts."

On this issue, Obama gave as good as he got, mocking Romney's insistence that
his own economic plan would not include tax cuts for the rich.

"Well, for 18 months he's been running on this tax plan, and now five weeks
before the election, he says his big bold idea is 'never mind,' " Obama
said.Rather than rebutting Romney point by point, Obama offered a broad defense
of his policies and the slow-to-recover economy.

"When I walked into the Oval Office, I had more than a trillion-dollar deficit
greeting me,"' Obama said. "And we know where it came from: Two wars that were
paid for on a credit card; two tax cuts that were not paid for; and a whole
bunch of programs that were not paid for, and then a massive economic crisis."

Obama grew animated when defending his health care legislation - "I have become
fond of this term, 'Obamacare,' " the President said - while accusing Romney of
not explaining the details of his tax and health care plans.

The policy-heavy debate included few of the much-ballyhooed zingers but opened
with a light moment, as Obama wished his wife - sitting in the audience - a
happy 20th anniversary.

"A year from now, we will not be celebrating it in front of 40 million people,"
joked Obama.Romney entered the debate trailing slightly in the overall polls but
by larger margins in many of the swing states that will decide the election.

When it was over, many independent analysts said Romney gave himself a chance to
begin turning the numbers around.

"This is going to be a test of how much debates can change the polls. There's no
real question that Romney won the first debate," said Larry Sabato of the
University of Virginia.

"But it was a wonky debate, not scintillating," Sabato continued. "Will the
debate matter? Are the partisans just cheering for their side? We'll find out."

But Republican strategists were ebullient in the moments after the candidates
left the Colorado stage.

"It's a 'NSR' night," senior adviser Ron Kaufman told the Daily News. "No spin
required."

And even Obama's team conceded that Romney won - at least on style if not on
substance.

"It pains me to say this," a senior Obama strategist said glumly, "but this was
not a good night for us. Romney was strong, specific and convincing."

The men at the top of their tickets will cede the spotlights to their running
mates, Vice President Biden and Rep. Paul Ryan, who will debate next week.

jlemire@nydailynews.com

TWEETS

Twitter Government@gov: Tonight's debate was the most tweeted about event in US
political history, topping the numbers from the RNC and DNC.

Bill Maher @billmaher: I can't believe I'm saying this but Obama looks like he
DOES need a teleprompter.

Joe Hagan @joehagansays: Worse wedding anniversary ever? #obama #debate2012

Zach Braff @zachbraff: Romney's doing an awesome job moderating while Jim takes
a light nap.

Chris Rock @chrisrock: Obama is waiting for the right moment to pull out Bin
Laden's skull from behind the podium. Wait for it. Wait for it . . .

Tagg Romney @tromney: Now that was fun.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Rumble in the Rockies on Wednesday night began debate season for the
two men who are vying to call the White House home. REUTERS MITT ROMNEY AP
BARACK OBAMA REUTERS JOE BIDEN AP PAUL RYAN AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
