
                              49 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                            Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION


BYLINE: James O'Toole, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

SECTION: NATIONAL; THE ROAD TO THE WHITE HOUSE; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1111 words


DENVER -- President Barack Obama and former Gov. Mitt Romney battled for 90
minutes Wednesday in detail-laden jousting over tax plans, health care and
government regulation.

The first of their three debates took place on the campus of the University of
Denver, moderated by veteran PBS anchor Jim Lehrer, who often had a tough time
keeping two well-prepared combatants to their topics and time limits.

The candidates entered flashing big smiles and exchanged a hearty handshake
before the often wonkish policy clashes. Mr. Obama opened with an anniversary
wish to his wife, Michelle, who watched from the front row along with Mr.
Romney's wife, Ann. Mr. Romney kidded that the debate was a less than ideal
setting for their celebration.

"I'm sure this was the most romantic place you could imagine here -- with me,"
he said, in a quip that highlighted the fact that he sometimes seemed to be
having a better time on stage than the president.

The exchanges that followed reflected the fact that both candidates were
performing a balancing act in trying to attack without appearing excessively
caustic or aggressive. That dilemma was particularly acute for Mr. Romney, who
entered the debate with the burden of a chronic disadvantage in his favorability
ratings. But playing the challenger's traditional role of the aggressor, he
managed to be on the attack without verging into anger as both candidates
maintained civil, even tones throughout. Mr. Romney did take a swipe at Mr.
Lehrer when he said that though he loves Big Bird, his administration would cut
funding to PBS.

The candidates differed sharply on one another's tax plans; each man also
disputed the other's description of his plan.

Mr. Romney has said he will reduce all income tax rates by 20 percent, but avoid
an unacceptable loss of revenue by eliminating unspecified deductions and
preferences in the current tax code. Mr. Obama characterized that as a $5
trillion tax cut, which he said would both favor the wealthy and vastly increase
the deficit. Mr. Romney insisted that the $5 trillion figure was not accurate.
He contended his proposal would produce economic growth and resulting revenue to
counteract the need for the kinds of spending cuts Mr. Obama said would be
inevitable.

"My number one principal is, there will be no tax cut that adds to the deficit,"
he said.

Mr. Obama contended that Mr. Romney's stance was belied by his rhetoric
throughout the campaign.

"Well, for 18 months he's been running on this tax plan. And now, five weeks
before the election, he's saying that his big, bold idea is -- 'Never mind,' "
he said. "It is not possible to come up with enough deductions and loopholes
that only affect high-income individuals to avoid either raising the deficit or
burdening the middle class. It's math. It's arithmetic.''

The Republican also argued that Mr. Obama's call for an increase in taxes on
wealthier Americans would cost jobs. Mr. Obama denied that, noting that the vast
majority of smaller business would not pay the top rate.

Mr. Obama argued that the economic analysis that Mr. Romney advanced was at odds
with recent history. He noted that under former President Clinton tax rates had
been similar to his proposals, and yet the nation's job picture was much
healthier than under the Bush administration when the economy lagged despite a
succession of tax cuts.

"We've tried both approaches,'' Mr. Obama said, calling Mr. Romney's argument,
"the same sales pitch that was made in 2001 and 2003 ... [that culminated ] in
the worst economic crisis since the great Depression."

"Virtually everything he just said about my tax plan is inaccurate,'' Mr. Romney
said. "I will not reduce the share paid by high income individuals.''

Mr. Obama pressed Mr. Romney on the lack of specificity in his answers and in
his proposals. The exchanges on Medicare were a continuation of one of the
campaign's more persistent disputes. The Affordable Health care Act --Obamacare
in the term coined by Republican and lately embraced by Democrats, including Mr.
Obama Wednesday night, takes $710 billion from projected rate of growth of
payment to hospitals and insurers and devotes it instead to the costs of the new
law.

That was the basis of a charge Republicans used effectively against Democrats in
2010 as the GOP accused them of "robbing Medicare,'' an attack line that helped
them recapture the House, and one that Mr. Romney returned to repeatedly.

Mr. Obama defended his legislation and turned the attack on Mr. Romney as he
said his plan to partially shift Medicare to a voucher plan for younger citizens
would place seniors at risk and eventually lad to the ruin of traditional
Medicare system that would exist alongside the private plans that Mr. Romney
envisions.

Mr. Obama insisted that Mr. Romney had not offered any real plan for how he
would replace the health care act, charging that the Republican's plan would
leave vulnerable citizens with pre-existing medical conditions.

The pair also differed sharply on government regulation. While acknowledging
that some regulation of business and markets was essential, Mr. Romney restated
his opposition to the Dodd-Frank legislation, designed to increase oversight of
Wall Street.

"Does anyone out there think the problem we had was too much regulation of Wall
Street?" Mr. Obama asked. "Because if you do, Gov. Romney is your candidate."

Instant polls commissioned by two television networks suggested that Mr. Romney
had had the better night. A CNN survey gave the Republican the debate by a
margin of 67 percent to 25 percent. A CBS poll was nearly as one-sided, favoring
Mr. Romney 46 percent to 22 percent.

The debate came after other polls had shown Mr. Obama with a narrow lead
nationally and more significant advantages in most of the key states expected to
determine the election, though recent days have brought some evidence of
movement in Mr. Romney's direction.

Gallup's daily tracking poll showed the president leading 49 percent to 45
percent on the evening of the encounter, while Rasmussen saw a slightly closer
race, 49 percent to 47 percent.

The latest Wall Street Journal/NBC survey fond the national race at 49 percent
for Mr. Obama and 46 percent for Mr. Romney, a margin down slightly from the
five-point race the same poll found in mid-September. In the state-by-state
competition, however, Mr. Obama held a stronger hand with just over a month
before election day. Ohio increasingly seemed to be joining its Pennsylvania
neighbor as a traditional battleground slipping into the Democratic column. But
new surveys in Virginia and Florida suggested some tightening, cutting into the
president's persistent but narrow leads there.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Politics Editor James O'Toole: jotoole@post-gazette.com, 412 263-1562 /

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: David Goldman/Associated Press: The candidates, former Gov. Mitt
Romney and President Barack Obama, acknowledge the audience before Wednesday
night's debate in Denver.
PHOTO: Saul Loeb/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images: Spouses of the candidates,
first lady Michelle Obama, left, and Ann Romney, greet each other before the
presidential debate at the University of Denver.
PHOTO: Julia Rendleman/Post-Gazette: Sharon Ciocca of Wexford cheers for former
Gov. Mitt Romney Wednesday at Vincent's of Green Tree during the first
presidential debate. "I think Romney is smearing him," she said.
PHOTO: Bill Wade/Post-Gazette: A crowd of mostly University of Pittsburgh
students, including Olivia Biancini, Kathtyn Caric and Iris Koryurek, watch the
presidential debate at the Obama For America office in Oakland.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
