
                              50 of 1244 DOCUMENTS


                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

WAS THIS THE NIGHT OBAMA LOST THE WHITE HOUSE?

LENGTH: 1451 words


GAFFE-PRONE REPUBLICAN CONTENDER MITT ROMNEY DEFIED THE ODDS AND WIPED THE F
LOOR WITH PRESIDENT OBAMA IN THE FIRST TV DEBATE. SO ...

BY TOM LEONARD

The night may yet go down in history as the one the US presidential election
changed course and when Barack Obama lost the White House. After all the months
of vicious propaganda and underhand sniping, the two men vying to be America's
next president finally met head to head and Mr Obama blinked first.

Actually, you couldn't easily be sure what he was doing with his eyes during
Wednesday night's first presidential TV debate because Mr Obama spent so much of
the time staring down at his notes, refusing to look at either his opponent or
the camera capturing the event for 50 million voters watching at home.

His performance was so listless and lacklustre as he allowed his rival Mitt
Romney to tear into his economic record in 90 minutes of television, that the
president has single-handedly reopened Republican chances in an election
campaign that many believed had already been won by the Democrats.

Where was the persuasive, passionate Mr Obama who won over America, and much of
the world, four years ago with his sweeping rhetoric and grand vision? Perhaps
he was wondering whether he and his wife Michelle, sitting there watching from
the audience in Denver, might not have been better occupied celebrating their
20th wedding anniversary which fell that evening, instead of listening to
impertinent questions from the man who has been dubbed Mitt the Twit'.

Mr Obama certainly looked like a man suffering from a serious lack of enthusiasm
for another four years as President.

One commentator witheringly described him as so uninvolved in the event that he
was like that guy in a meeting who's surreptitiously checking his email'.

And as Republican campaigners yesterday rubbed their hands with glee, and their
Democrat opponents rubbed their eyes in disbelief, early opinion polls suggested
voters agree with the verdict of the political professionals.

Incredible as it sounds, Mr Romney, a politician dismissed all along as
unengaging, gaffe-prone and robotic, wiped the floor with one of the greatest
orators of his generation. And in a one-on-one debate of all things.

Obama aides gripe that Mr Romney failed to flesh out how he will fund his
proposed tax cuts, which the Democrats claims will cost $5 trillion (although
Romney denies it is that much), and claim there are other gaping holes in his
economic plan.

But the president's embarrassed supporters reacted with undisguised fury
yesterday after the debate, berating him for failing to land even a few telling
blows. Mr Obama was so bad he looked like he needed a teleprompter' said
Left-wing comedian Bill Maher.

The real puzzle, say Obama supporters, is why their man did not once mention two
of the biggest perceived blots on the Romney copy book his Wall Street history
as a private equity baron buying and selling companies for a quick profit, and
his infamous remark dismissing the 47 per cent of Americans who claim government
benefits as spongeing victims'.



S ome suggest the President didn't want to look too aggressive and jeopardise
his lead in the opinion polls. Others have claimed his problem might have been
arrogance that, after four years of lording it in the White House, the President
simply isn't used to anyone standing up to him, and can't cope with it.

Whatever the case, he left the way open to Mr Romney finally to find his voice
on the economy, in a debate where his views could not be filtered through a
hostile liberal media which has portrayed the Mormon businessman as a hapless
buffoon who wants only to help fellow millionaires.

The Republican argued forcefully his central point that the US economy will
prosper only if its all-important middle class is encouraged to stand on its own
two feet, unburdened by high taxes that discourage growth. His message was
simple: the spirit of entrepreneurship that had made America an economic
powerhouse would not survive another four years of Obama.

In a country that is still struggling with unemployment at more than eight per
cent, it is an argument that may yet propel him into the White House.

Seeming almost paralysed at times, Mr Obama smirked and scowled with irritation
as his own approach of tax and spend, and a growing dependency on government to
get America out of the rough, was put through the wringer by a man who appeared
to be far more in command of the facts and figures.

The much-vaunted Obama administration, said his opponent, had left 23 million
people out of work and one in six living in poverty.

As for Mr Obama, he kept harking back to the economic boom years under fellow
Democrat Bill Clinton. Voters must surely have wondered why he wasn't talking up
his own time in power instead.

And while the President implied that America's economic problems were down to
his predecessor, George W Bush, Romney countered that the US recovery from the
economic crisis had been neither quick or strong enough when Obama was at the
helm.

Tough and direct without getting nasty as he has done in previous debates with
other politicians Mr Romney worked hard to shed his image as cold-hearted
business executive worried only by the bottom line.

Many have always said he is a moderate Republican underneath all the Right-wing
bluster, and this came out in the debate. Indeed, possibly his most cold-hearted
suggestion was when he singled out the children's TV show Sesame Street, which
airs in the US on the publicly-funded PBS channel, as the sort of thing his
government would no longer subsidise.

I love Big Bird,' he said of the show's dippy but much loved eight-foot high
yellow bird.

But I'm not going to keep on spending money on things to borrow money from China
to pay for.'

True, there were few light moments, no sign of a Mitt the Wit'. Nor were there
any real fireworks aides say both men were coached to keep their tempers.



B ut Mr Romney was at times direct and cutting. During an exchange on education,
he said: You're entitled, Mr President, as the President to your own airplane
and your own house, but not to your own facts.'

In another exchange, Mr Romney brought his own children into the debate to
highlight Mr Obama's supposed falsehoods.

Look, I've got five boys,' said Mr Romney. I'm used to people saying something
that's not always true, but keeping on repeating it and ultimately hoping I'll
believe it.'

Much of the debate concerned highly technical and boring issues like bank
regulation and the minutiae of tax rates. But TV Presidential debates are all
about image and projection, and on those criteria Mr Romney romped home.

Unlike the UK, which adopted them only in the 2010 General Election, Americans
have been hooked on TV election debates since the first one took place between
John F Kennedy and Richard Nixon in 1960 an encounter that highlighted the
contrast between the bronzed warrior', as one commentator dubbed JFK, and an
unhealthy, shifty-looking Tricky Dicky.

The political parties set great store by the debates, which are seen as a way of
cutting through the propaganda from ruthless multi-billion dollar advertising
campaigns and carefully stage-managed hustings.

With Mr Romney behind in the polls, the pressure was always going to be on him
to make the first of their three TV debates tell.

His party has been loudly and rightly complaining that, for politically correct
reasons, most of the US media is terrified of criticising America's first black
President too loudly.

An impartially-moderated TV debate was seen as the perfect opportunity to
overcome that bias.

Mr Romney spent months preparing for the debates, practising for hours on end
with Rob Portman, an Ohio senator with an uncanny ability to mimic Mr Obama. The
President, on the other hand, prepared very much less because he had to fit
rehearsals into his busy schedule as Leader of the Free World.

If the debate moves the polls in Mr Romney's favour, he has a real chance of
becoming President although he has a lot of ground to make up in the crucial
battleground' states that could swing either way when voting in November.

But the omens are good. A CNN poll released after the debate showed 67 per cent
of viewers thought Mr Romney won while just 25 per cent opted for the President.

A CBS poll had 46 per cent of undecided voters giving victory to the Republican
against just 22 per cent for Mr Obama.

The next TV debate between the Vice-Presidential contenders is less than a week
away in Kentucky, with tough-talking Republican enfant terrible Paul Ryan taking
on the avuncular but gaffe-prone Joe Biden, America's answer to John Prescott.

And some say that another Republican walkover could be on the cards.

© Daily Mail

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2012 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
