
                              51 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                            The Independent (London)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                 First Edition

THE HEAT IS ON MR COOL;
Romney's surprise assault leaves Team Obama battling to regroup, says David
Usborne in Denver AMERICA DECIDES

BYLINE: David Usborne

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1194 words


Bamboozled by a fiercely belligerent debate performance by Mitt Romney, the
Barack Obama campaign was rushing to regroup yesterday to protect its momentum
in a presidential contest that overnight seemed to have travelled from nearly
foregone to suddenly competitive again.

There was consternation, if not despair, in Democrat ranks that a
cool-verging-on-chilly Mr Obama eschewed assailing his opponent on issues
ranging from his stewardship of Bain capital and his dismissive remarks caught
on video tape about 47 per cent of Americans taking handouts, and seemed almost
passive before a relentless bombardment of his presidential record.

"Under the President's policies middle-income Americans have been buried, they
are just being crushed," Mr Romney averred, looking directly at the President,
who, by contrast, spent a lot of the time looking down at notes. "What we're
seeing right now is a trickle-down government approach which has government
thinking it can do a better job than people pursuing their dreams. It's not
working."

The 90-minute face-off on Wednesday night was a study not just in the opposing
ideologies of the two candidates, whether on their visions of the place of
government in society, their tax plans, healthcare reform, or tackling the
deficit, but also in opposing debating styles. While Mr Romney walked out fired
up and ready to go - to steal an Obama slogan - the President seemed
de-caffeinated, giving winding answers long on detail and statistics but short
on passion.

Early polling by CNN said that 67 per cent of viewers at home saw Mr Romney as
the winner and certainly pundits and commentators, including many normally
friendly to the Democrats, did not hesitate to agree. If the post-debate spin
and commentary matter as much as the encounter itself the incumbent did
horribly.

Both candidates returned instantly to the road. Mr Obama, determined to reclaim
the narrative, addressed a rally under chilled grey skies in Denver, while Mr
Romney, hoping to capitalise on his debate reviews, travelled to Virginia.
However, President Obama faces another road-bump just this morning when the
government will unveil the latest unemployment numbers that are unlikely to
offer cheer.

Keenly awaited now is post-debate polling data, especially in battle- ground
states. Obama aides denied the debate had done him harm, arguing Mr Romney had
come off over-agitated while the President had sought intelligent discourse with
voters, deliberately declining to play attack-dog. The American people are "not
looking for an Attacker-in-Chief, they are looking for a Commander-in-Chief,"
said spokeswoman Jen Psaki.

Some of the more heated exchanges between the men were also coming under closer
scrutiny, notably Mr Romney's refusal on the stage to accept Mr Obama's
assertion that his economic plan spelled $5 trillion in tax cuts, many of them
for the rich, which would have to be paid for in part by increased taxes on the
middle class.

"I don't have a $5 trillion tax cut. I don't have a tax cut of the scale that
you're talking about. If the tax plan he just described were a tax plan I were
asked to support, I'd say absolutely not," Mr Romney said, while on his part
making the claim, disputed by Democrats, that Mr Obama had stripped $716bn from
Medicare, the health programme for retirees, to pay for his overhaul of the US
health system.

David Axelrod, a top Obama strategist, acknowledged that Romney may have made a
stronger than expected impression. "I give him credit for a strong performance,"
but then he added, "I give him an 'F' for being honest with the American
people."

The New York Times went further: "Virtually every time Mr Romney spoke, he
misrepresented the platform on which he and Paul Ryan are actually running," it
said in an editorial. "The most prominent example, taking up the first half-hour
of the debate, was on taxes. Mr Romney claimed, against considerable evidence,
that he had no intention of cutting taxes on the rich or enacting a tax cut that
would increase the deficit. That simply isn't true."

Mr Obama took up the theme at yesterday's Denver rally. "You owe the American
people the truth," he said referring directly to his rival. "Here is the truth,
Governor Romney cannot pay for his $5 trillion tax plan without blowing out the
deficit or sticking it to the middle class, that's the truth."

DEBATE

POINTS SCORED

Big Bird

Romney underscored that he will attack the deficit by cutting funding to
programmes he thinks unnecessary, including subsidies for the Public
Broadcasting System (PBS), home of Big Bird. "I'm going to stop the subsidy to
PBS. I'm going to stop other things. I like PBS. I love Big Bird. I actually
like you, too. But I'm not going to keep on spending money on things to borrow
money from China to pay for it."

Taxes

Obama claimed that Romney's plan would result in $5trn in tax cuts that would
force him to raise taxes on the middle class. "I don't have a $5trn tax cut,"
Romney shot back. But the President repeated that that would be the impact of
his plan, which also includes big funding rise for the military.

Facts and fibs

"You're entitled to your own airplane and your own house, but not your own
facts," Romney said after being told he would cut education funding. Similarly,
Obama was not impressed when Romney denied he had a $5trn tax-cut plan. After
promoting the proposal for 18 months, Romney now "is saying, his big, bold idea
is, 'never mind'," the President said.

VOTERS' PANEL

WHAT THEY THINK OF THE SHOW SO FAR

CHERLENE NERLAND, 37, housewife, votes in Mississippi

2008 - did not vote

2012 - undecided

Obama looked more presidential and Romney at times had crazy eyes and a weird
smirk. I was dismayed Romney said he'd cut the deductions and credits people
claim on their taxes.

DIANE BERGIN, 44, housewife, votes in Florida

2008 - voted McCain

2012 - undecided

Mitt Romney won, hands down. He even looked presidential. He also seemed more
prepared to go on the offence. Obama looked flustered and rather bored. I'm
still undecided, but now leaning towards Mitt.

ANDY SORENSEN, 23, university student, votes in Minnesota

2008 - voted McCain

2012 - plans to vote Romney

This was an Obama I'd not seen. Obamacare is his pet project, and he couldn't
muster the passion to defend it. It was charisma that got him votes in 2008, and
a lack of it will cost him dearly in 2012.

JAMIE KLINGLER, 34, publishing manager, votes in Pennsylvania

2008 - voted Obama

2012 - plans to vote Obama

Obama seemed tired and subdued. I wish he'd just quoted the "47 per cent" video
in answer to every question and let Romney hang himself with his own words.

BRIAN CLUTTER, 30, IT support specialist, votes in Ohio

2008 - voted McCain

2012 - plans to vote Romney

I was surprised by Obama's lack of passion. Romney kept the upper hand. He felt
like "the adult in the room". I'll cringe once social issues come up, but for
now I'm behind Romney.

DC STULTZ, 72, retired, votes in Florida

2008 - voted Obama

2012 - plans to vote Obama

Romney was the aggressor. Did that make him the "winner"? Not if the content
contains faulty assumptions, flip flops that will be walked back by his campaign
the next day, and outright lies.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2012 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
