
                              52 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Mitt Romney comes out on top as Obama stumbles in first debate

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskillguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 921 words

ABSTRACT

Republican candidate lifts conservative morale with a strong and forceful
performance against a passive, lacklustre Obama

FULL TEXT

Mitt Romney raised Republican hopes of an election comeback with a spirited and
aggressive performance that forced Barack Obama repeatedly onto the defensive in
the first presidential debate.

Although Romney is still trailing badly in the polls, especially in the crucial
swing states, his strong showing lifted conservative morale with more than four
weeks left to turn the campaign around.

The two sparred mainly over the economy, in particular tax, jobs and health care
during a statistics and policy-laden 90-minute debate that was expected to draw
an audience of more than 50 million.

Romney was forceful from the start, accusing Obama of repeatedly portraying his
policies as inaccurate, and he maintained that momentum throughout. Obama,
looking tired and at times irritated, remained largely calm.

In the spin room afterwards, Romney's campaign team hailed it as a victory. Eric
Fehrnstrom, Romney's campaign spokesman, could not contain his glee.

"Governor Romney clearly won," he said. "If this was a boxing match, the referee
would have stopped it." He predicted it would be "a close race".

David Plouffe, one of the architects of Obama's victory in 2008 and a senior
member of his campaign this year, was subdued. "We are going to come out of this
debate okay," he said, adding that the Romney team had needed a game-changer and
this was not one.

Another of Obama's campaign team, Stephanie Cutter, insisted Obama had won the
debate on substance but, unusually for this tough spokeswoman who normally gives
little ground, she admitted Romney had won for style and preparation.

A CNN flash poll of registered voters had 67% saying Romney had won it, while
just 25% gave it to Obama.

One of Bill Clinton's best-known strategists, James Carville, told CNN he had
been left with "one overwhelming impression ... It looked like Romney wanted to
be there and President Obama didn't want to be there....It gave you the
impression that this whole thing was a lot of trouble."

Romney needed a good night after being confronted with setback after setback
over the last two months that have left him behind Obama in the polls. While
Obama remains favourite to secure re-election on 6 November, Romney may at least
have stopped his gradual campaign slump. The first of the clashes came over the
economy, with Obama asking how Romney was simultaneously going to cut the
country's burgeoning defict while at the same time cutting $5 trillion in taxes
for the wealthy, extending Bush era tax cuts and raising military spending, a
total of $8 million.

Romney just flat-out denied it. In the tone he maintained most of the night, he
said: "I think first of all, let me - let me repeat - let me repeat what I said.
I'm not in favour of a $5 trillion tax cut. That's not my plan...So you may keep
referring to it as a $5 trillion tax cut, but that's not my plan."

Obama, seemingly frustrated with Romney's elusiveness, retorted that it had been
his plan for 18 months. "And now, five weeks before the election, he's saying
that his big, bold idea is, 'Never mind."

At times, Romney patronised the president, saying that he did not understand
business or accountancy. "Mr President, you're entitled to your own airplane and
your own house, but not your own facts," he said at one point. In another
powerful attack which is at the core of the Romney message, he listed unkept
promises and told Obama: "You've been president for four years."

The president, by contrast, was hesitant in his responses. One of the biggest
surprises was that he failed to deliver any of the attacks that have been
successful on the campaign trail and which have been used to devastating effect
in television ads in swing states. There was no mention of Romney's disparaging
remarks about the 47% of the population being freeloaders, nor of his opponent's
tenure at Bain Capital.

The main image of the night will be of Romney, eyes alight, gesticulating from
the podium with a rarely-seen passion while Obama, playing into his image as
professorial, delivered most of his answers with his head down.

Romney did not raise the killings of the US ambassador to Libya Chris Stevens
and three other Americans, an emotive issue. Although the debate was meant to be
devoted to domestic policy, there has been speculation he might attempt to slip
it in.

On health care reform, Obama defended his controverial changes to expand
coverage, saying it was almost identical to changes introduced by Romney while
he was governor of Massachusetts.

Romney denied they were identical and claimed Obama's plan increased cost and
reiterated he would repeal the reform.

"In my opinion, the government is not effective in bringing down the cost of
almost anything. The right answer is not to have the federal government take
over health care,'' Romney said.

Both candidates hit the campaign trail again on Thursday, with Obama holding
rallies in Colorado and Wisconsin and Romney in Virginia. It was not a
disastrous night for Obama. That calm, measured approach is part of the reason
many Democrats like him and it may appeal too to independents.

Most debates have little impact on the eventual outcome but there have been
exceptions, such as the 1960 one and that between Al Gore and George W. Bush in
2000. While this one will not go down as comparable game-changers, it will at
least change the growing perception of Romney as a loser, even if only
temporarily.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
