
                              56 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                      Farmington Daily Times (New Mexico)

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Romney barrels out of first debate on offense

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1184 words


DENVER (AP)   Little more than a month from Election Day, Republican Mitt Romney
is barreling out of the first presidential debate energized by a solid
performance that telegraphed his determination to take it to President Barack
Obama with gusto. The president, intent on keeping his momentum from stalling,
is warning Americans that his GOP rival's policy prescriptions for a fragile
economy are more fantasy than reality.

Standing toe-to-toe with the president for the first time in the campaign,
Romney held his own and more at a time when there already were signs that the
race is tightening in some of the battleground states where Obama has enjoyed an
advantage. Obama kept his cool and signaled that he won't let up on his message
that Romney's plans on taxes, health care, the deficit and more just don't add
up.

"It's fun," Romney declared well into Wednesday night's 90-minute faceoff,
clearly relishing the back-and-forth.

"It's arithmetic," said Obama, hammering at Romney's conspicuous lack of details
with far less enthusiasm.

After a few days of relative calm as the candidates prepared for the first of
their three debates, the campaign now bursts out of Colorado in all directions,
with an itinerary that touches down in some of the most hotly contested
battleground states over the next few days: Obama campaigns in Colorado and
Wisconsin, then on to Virginia and Ohio. Romney and running mate Paul Ryan are
off to Virginia on Thursday, then Romney spends more time in Virginia before
moving on to Florida. Vice President Joe Biden is bound for Iowa.

With a 13-day break before their next debate, Obama and Romney have time to hone
their arguments while their campaigns continuing to bombard the most hotly
contested states with negative ads that go far beyond the more restrained jibes
the candidates leveled from their respective podiums. Obama made no mention, for
example, of Romney's caught-on-tape remark that he's not worried about the 47
percent of Americans who don't pay taxes. Democratic ads, though, have been
making hay with the comment.

Asked why the president didn't raise the video, Obama senior political adviser
David David Axelrod suggested on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" that he didn't need to
since it has been so widely seen and heard. "The president's belief is that's
something that has been very much a part of the discussion," Axelrod said.

In next few weeks, Romney is expected to give a number of policy speeches
filling in details as he tries to sharpen the contrast with Obama while
answering criticism that he hasn't clearly outlined his plans. The Republican
challenger begins with a foreign policy speech in Virginia on Monday. Subsequent
speeches are expected to focus on his plans for job creation, debt and spending.

Romney has promised to balance the budget in eight years to 10 years, but hasn't
explained just how he'll do it. Instead, he's promised a set of principles, some
of which   like increasing Pentagon spending and restoring more than $700
billion in cuts to Medicare over the coming decade   work against that goal. He
also has said he will not consider tax increases.

Obama argued that it's all too much.

"At some point, I think the American people have to ask themselves, is the
reason that Governor Romney is keeping all these plans to replace secret because
they're too good?" he said. "Is it because that somehow middle-class families
are going to benefit too much from them? No."

The president went on to say the nation faces tough problems that defy simple
solutions and said his own choices were "benefiting middle-class families all
across the country."

Romney maintained it was Obama who was crushing the middle class and getting the
numbers wrong, telling him, "Mr. President, you're entitled to your own airplane
and your own house, but not your own facts."

The two candidates planted themselves behind wooden lecterns and faced off
before about a crowd of fewer than 1,000 people at the University of Denver. But
their policy-heavy debate really was aimed at the tens of millions of television
viewers who tuned in, particularly those who are undecided or soft in their
support for a candidate. Just the sort of voters who may be less partisan and
more interested in hearing specifics.

Karl Amelchenko, an Obama supporter who watched the debate at a storefront art
gallery in Raleigh, N.C., thought Romney did himself some good.

"I think he won, unfortunately," Amelchenko said. "I think he might change some
minds."

But some voters still aren't ready to commit one way or the other.

Cynthia Gerst, a state worker in Ohio who attended a nonpartisan debate watch
party in downtown Columbus, confessed she's "been under a rock, but now I'm
ready" to pay attention. She leans Democratic, but hasn't made up her mind.

"I couldn't distinguish who was in the right," she said after the debate.

Axelrod said on NBC's "Today" show Thursday that the former Massachusetts
governor had "big gaps in truth that we saw" and said that Obama will set the
record straight. He charged that Romney "refused to offer any way to pay" for
the broad-ranging tax cut he advocated.

"I give him credit for a strong performance. I give him an F for being honest
with the American people," Axelrod said.

Ed Gillespie, a top aide to Romney, said that what people saw in the debate was
a presidential challenger "who had a command of the facts."

"He had a very fact-based critique of Obama's policies," Gillespie said on NBC,
adding that "we didn't hear very much, frankly, from President Obama about a
second-term agenda."

Both candidates came into the debate with distinct missions, and largely
achieved them: Romney needed to project leadership and dispel the image of an
out-of-touch elitist. Obama needed to avoid making any major mistakes and press
the case that he still has more to offer.

The GOP nominee began his charm offensive from the outset, offering 20th wedding
anniversary wishes to the Obamas and joking that the debate hall was quite the
romantic setting. And then he quickly segued to the campaign's central issue
jobs   and called it "a very tender topic."

Obama sketched out his familiar agenda of improving schools, expanding energy
sources, increasing tax fairness and paying down the debt, then made a simple
but all-encompassing promise: "All of this is possible."

Each candidate wielded studies and experts to buttress his arguments, and each
hauled out anecdotes about ordinary Americans to connect with voters. Romney
spoke of the woman in Ohio who grabbed his arm and told him she's been out of
work since May. Obama recalled the teacher he met in Las Vegas who had students
sitting on the floor and using 10-year-old textbooks.

Biden and Ryan were probably two of the most attentive viewers: Their own debate
is up next, on Oct. 11 at Centre College in Danville, Ky. Their rival
rehearsals, with stand-ins for their opponents, already are well under way.

Obama and Romney go back at it on Oct. 16, in a town hall-style format at
Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y. Their final faceoff, on foreign affairs,
is Oct. 22 at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


       Copyright 2012 Farmington Daily Times, a MediaNews Group Newspaper
                              All Rights Reserved
