
                              57 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                              The Pioneer (India)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

Romney at his best, upsets Obama in Debate One

LENGTH: 1064 words

DATELINE: Washington


Washington, Oct. 5 -- Cast as the underdog in most polls and media projections,
Republican challenger Mitt Romney sent shockwaves through the Democratic
establishment with an astounding performance that virtually caught President
Barack Obama napping in the first presidential debate in Denver on Wednesday
night.

The man who had been mostly written off by pundits and pollsters was at his
aggressive best from the word go as he set about tearing Obama's record on
management of the economy and projecting himself as the one with a roadmap to
address America's foremost problem: jobs

Obama's responses during the face-off were regarded as uncharacteristically
weak. Commentators felt the president was somewhat out-of-sorts and disengaged,
while Romney excelled in both style and substance. They all wondered why Obama
failed to challenge Romney on issues such as his controversial comment about the
"47 per cent" who don't pay taxes, his outsourcing of jobs as CEO, and his
parking of wealth in foreign tax havens.

Not long after the encounter, a CNN snap poll of registered voters said 67 per
cent pronounced Romney the winner, with a mere 25 per cent saying Obama won the
round. A CBS News poll of undecided voters found 46 per cent siding with Romney,
22 per cent backing Obama and 32 per cent terming it a tie.

Although the Republicans are out painting the town red, it remains to be seen
whether Romney, who has been trailing in about every poll over the past month,
is able to "shake up" the race. "We have a new race," proclaimed Republican
Senator Marco Rubio. But one will have to wait for tracking polls over the next
several days to see if Romney gets a bounce of consequence. One also has to
reckon the distinct possibility of Obama bouncing back in the next two rounds of
debate on October 16 and 22.

But for now, the Republicans are on cloud nine, asserting that Romney has made a
compelling case on why America has to take a different path for economic
revival. "Mitt Romney demonstrated that he has a plan to get America back to
work and showed that President Obama's policies will do nothing but continue the
worst economic recovery since the Great Depression," said Republican National
Committee chairman Reince Priebus.

The Democrats, putting up a brave face, picked holes in Romney's claims over his
economic blueprint and tax plan. After the debate, the Obama campaign issued a
lengthy critique, saying: "President Obama outlined his concrete plans to move
America forward in the next four years, while Mitt Romney was on the defensive,
unable to explain the math behind his $5 trillion tax cut favoring the wealthy
or back up his claims with facts or specifics."

Analysts felt Obama had simply let go the opportunity to attack Romney's
comments about 47 per cent of Americans who do not pay taxes but would be voting
for the president because of the government entitlement he provided them.

They said he also failed to blast Romney's record as CEO of Bain Capital, when
jobs were outsourced to China. Also, the issue of moving his wealth to offshore
havens like Cayman Islands in order to escape America's tax laws. All these have
been prominent aspects of Obama campaign's attack ads against Romney, but they
were not brought up in the debate.

During the 90-minute debate, marked by some feisty exchanges, mounted mostly by
Romney, the two questioned each other's economic and tax policies. The
Republican challenger promised lower tax rates, asserting that the revenue base
would not be hurt since he would be creating a larger pool by adding 12 million
jobs over the next four years. Obama argued that Romney's numbers just did not
add up. "It's a question of math," he commented, even as Romney accused Obama of
misrepresenting his tax plan.

America, as President Obama put it, has come a long way since he took over at a
time when the country was in the grip of the worst financial crisis since the
1930s and millions of jobs were lost. He said 5 million jobs have been created
in the private sector over the last 30 months, the bankrupt auto industry has
come roaring back and the housing sector has begun to rise again. "But we all
know that we've still got a lot of work to do. And so the question here tonight
is not where we've been, but where we're going," he said, challenging Romney's
plan for economic revival.

For one derided by Democrats all through the campaign as a pro-rich candidate,
the millionaire Romney on this night ended up projecting himself as pro-middle
class. "It's going to take a different path. Not the one we've been on," he
said, asserting Obama's policies have "crushed" middle-class Americans. But
Obama pointed out that he has cut taxes for middle-class families by $3,600.

Romney kept attacking Obama repeatedly for the poor showing on the jobs front,
accusing him of skipping this central issue and instead focusing all his
energies in the first two years on healthcare overhaul without achieving a
bipartisan consensus.

Obama hit back by asserting that Romney's plan to return to the top-down
economics will land the country in the same mess all over again. Romney, he
said, was making the same sales pitch that was made in 2001 and 2003, but it
ended up with the slowest job growth in 50 years. The country moved moving from
surplus to deficits, and it all culminated in the worst financial crisis since
the Great Depression.

Romney sought to turn the tables on Obama on his signature achievement of health
care overhaul, claiming that when fully implemented it would result in 20
million people losing health insurance because either they or their employers
won't be able to afford the rising premium. Obama demanded that Romney spell out
details of the alternative scheme he is talking of after repealing 'Obamacare'
as his first act in the White House.

When Obama said Romney's proposals to cut cut taxes by $5 trillion and spend an
additional $2 trillion on defence will jack up the deficit, the Republican
accused him of misrepresenting his plan. "Virtually everything he described is
not my tax cut," Romney said, adding: "I will not reduce the share paid by
high-income individuals... I will not raise taxes on middle-income families."
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Pioneer. For any query with
respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor
at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 CMYK Printech Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
