
                              58 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                         Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)

                           October 3, 2012 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

OBAMA, ROMNEY FACE OFF TONIGHT Taxes,federal debt and jobs will likely dominate
key debate

BYLINE: David Lightman and Anita Kumar<br> McClatchy-Tribune

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: DENVER


President Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney will offer voters
two starkly different prescriptions for fixing the ailing economy as they duel
tonight in their first and perhaps most critical debate.

More than 60 million people are expected to watch when the nationally televised,
90-minute debate kicks off at 6 p.m. PDT, far more than watched the two major
party national conventions and dwarfing the number that watched Romney in
Republican primary debates.

Underscoring the significance, the men will arrive at the University of Denver
debate site after days of closed-door rehearsals, Obama in Nevada and Romney in
Colorado. The stakes are particularly high for Romney, the former Massachusetts
governor who's stayed close to Obama in most polls but continues to trail,
having struggled to find momentum.

"It's one of the few possible game changers left for him, and the only one he
has a certain amount of control over," said Tobe Berkovitz, an associate
professor of advertising at Boston University.

Most polls show Obama remains vulnerable - his Gallup job approval rating Sept.
28-30 was 47 percent, about where it's been for some time, and a Quinnipiac
Polling Institute survey released Tuesday, taken Sept. 25-30, put him ahead of
Romney 49 percent to 45 percent.

Obama also faces high expectations. Regardless of political spin from the
campaigns, Americans by a 2-to-1 margin expect Obama to win the debate,
according to polls. Romney has not engaged in a one-on-one political debate
since he ran for governor of Massachusetts 10 years ago, while Obama debated
Republican John McCain three times in 2008 and is a familiar presence on
American television.

The numbers suggest an opportunity for Romney, who will try to tell voters that
Obama should be held responsible for a stubbornly sluggish economy. Romney plans
to stress that Obama's remedies too often involve "going forward with a
stagnant, government-centered economy," said senior adviser Ed Gillespie.

Obama is trying to lower those expectations.

"Governor Romney, he's a good debater. I'm just OK," Obama said with a grin to a
Nevada audience earlier this week. "But what I'm most concerned about is having
a serious discussion about what we need to do to keep the country growing and
restore security for hardworking Americans. That's what people are going to be
listening for."

Alan Schroeder, a Northeastern University professor who has written a history of
presidential debates, "Presidential Debates: Fifty Years of High-Risk TV," said
Obama tended to be "very agreeable" with McCain in 2008.

"That was part of his strategy, to appear willing to extend the olive branch,
but I don't think that's going to fly this time," Schroeder said.

Barring a major gaffe or surprise, few analysts expect the debate to radically
change the race right away. Quinnipiac found that 86 percent thought it would
make no difference in how they voted.

But what a debate can do is plant images and ideas with voters that they'll seek
to confirm or dismiss over the campaign's final month.

The key economic flash points tonight are expected to involve taxes, the federal
debt and jobs.

Romney is running ads tying Obama to the government's $16 trillion debt, notably
in a recent spot showing a baby and talking about the debt she was inheriting.

Obama has pointed out that Romney's plans would mean even more debt.

Obama's predecessor, President George W. Bush, was responsible for a huge chunk
of the debt boom. When he took office in 2001, the figure was $5.7 trillion.
Because of tax cuts, a new Medicare drug program, war spending and other
factors, the debt was $10.6 trillion when he left office eight years later.

On jobs, Romney is expected to offer frequent reminders that the jobless rate
went over 8 percent during Obama's first full month in office in February 2009
and has never dropped below that level. That's the longest stretch over 8
percent since such records started 64 years ago.

The nation lost about 7.9 million jobs during the December 2007-June 2009
recession - most of which occurred during the Bush administration - but the pace
of hiring has since lagged behind usual post-recession standards.

Romney maintains his incentives for business would help create 12 million jobs
over four years. Obama is likely to tout his American Jobs Act, which would
provide government spending on public works projects as well as incentives for
business that would help create millions of jobs.

Both are expected to cite changes in the nation's tax system as key strategies
for job creation. Romney will urge continuing the Bush-era tax cuts, set to
expire at the end of this year, and further cut those rates 20 percent.

Obama wants to continue only the Bush cuts affecting families earning less than
$250,000 or individuals making less than $200,000.

Obama and Romney are scheduled to debate again Oct. 16 and 22. Vice President
Joe Biden and the Republican nominee, Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, will debate
Oct. 11.

Stand-ins for Republican presidential candidate, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt
Romney, left, and President Barack Obama shake hands on stage during a
rehearsal.

A stagehand uses a lint roller to clean the background on the stage at the
Magness Arena at the University of Denver on Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 Spokane Spokesman-Review
