
                              60 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                  Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                  ALL EDITION

THE SPEECH: A FIRED-UP PRESIDENT SAYS HIS OPPONENT SHIFTED HIS STANCE;
BIG MAN ON CAMPUS | MORE THAN 30,000 PACK BASCOM HILL FOR DAY-AFTER-DEBATE
RALLY;
PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITS MADISON

BYLINE: By MARY SPICUZZA and DEE J. HALL Wisconsin State Journal

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 904 words


In the wake of promising poll numbers but a bruising first debate with Mitt
Romney, a fiery President Barack Obama kicked off the final month of the
campaign Thursday in Madison, where he faced a sea of supporters in this
famously liberal city.

UW-Madison police estimated the crowd inside the barriers at Bascom Hill at
30,000, the largest of the 2012 presidential campaign.

During a 22-minute speech, Obama poked fun at his opponent ? and partially
explained his lackluster debate performance Wednesday ? by saying the "spirited
fellow" on the stage with him in Denver was not Republican challenger Mitt
Romney but "the man playing Mitt Romney."

The president ticked off a series of issues on which he said Romney switched
positions. At the debate, Romney said he would not cut taxes if it would make
the deficit worse ? which Obama charged Thursday was a new position for his GOP
challenger.

"I know it couldn't have been Mitt Romney ? because the real Mitt Romney has
been running around the country for the last year promising $5 trillion in tax
cuts that favor the wealthy," the president said. "And yet, the fellow on the
stage last night ? who looked like Mitt Romney ? said he did not know anything
about that. It was all news to him."

He said Romney's tax plan can't be paid for without "blowing up the deficit or
sticking it to the middle class."

Romney's Wisconsin spokesman, Ben Sparks, reiterated Romney's statements
Wednesday that his tax plan would not increase the nation's indebtedness and is
"revenue neutral." He accused the president of twisting Romney's proposal.

"His speech today," Sparks said Thursday, "was nothing but campaign rhetoric and
false attacks."

Despite that characterization, some supporters watching Obama's passionate
speech Thursday wondered where that Obama was on Wednesday night.

Among those leaving Bascom Hill, Terry Williamson, 49, of Milton, gave a common
critique: "He should have done last night what he did today. He came out like
his old self today."

"He was much more forceful today," said Marc Conrad, 29, of Madison. "He seemed
kind of lifeless (Wednesday) night."

"This was definitely the Obama we expect," said Bonnie Cubalchini, 63, of
Madison.

There were many nods to UW-Madison and the thousands of students blanketing
Bascom Hill ? some of whom waited nearly 12 hours for the president's speech.
Among Obama's first words, after meeting with the UW-Madison men's basketball
team, were "Go Badgers!"

The president was introduced by UW-Madison political science major Katherine
Iliff of Middleton who, like Obama and other speakers, urged the crowd to vote
early, beginning Oct. 22. Other Democrats addressed the crowd: U.S. Sen. Herb
Kohl, U.S. Rep. Tammy Baldwin, state Rep. Mark Pocan and Madison Mayor Paul
Soglin.

New polling released Wednesday showed Obama ahead of Romney by 11 points in
Wisconsin, but that gap narrowed slightly in the past few weeks.

"I believe in you," the president said to raucous applause and cheers. "I'm
asking you to believe in me."

Post-debate boost needed

Madison appeared to give Obama a needed infusion of energy after his flat debate
performance. The city is the bluest dot in a deeply purple battleground state,
and over the last six presidential elections voters in Dane County favored
Democrats by 20 or more points.

"President Obama is on his heels and chose to recover from a bad debate in one
of the most liberal places in America," Gov. Scott Walker said after the speech.
"Last night, swing voters in Wisconsin clearly saw that Mitt Romney is the
better choice to get America working again."

But Obama aides accused Romney of not rooting his debate in fact.

Top Obama campaign strategist David Axelrod told reporters Thursday morning that
Obama "made a choice not to get into serial fact-checking with Romney" on
Wednesday night. But he said the campaign might start highlighting answers they
believe to be dishonest.

"It was a very vigorous performance, but one that was devoid of honesty,"
Axelrod said of the challenger. "(Romney) may win an Oscar for his performance
last night, but he's not going to win the presidency."

Sparks responded that the president's performance was his own fault and stemmed
from a lack of ideas about how to help the struggling middle class.

"The president was unable and unwilling to defend his own record," the Romney
spokesman said.

Thursday's visit was Obama's second stop in Wisconsin in less than two weeks,
and at least his 25th stop in the state as a presidential candidate or
president. Obama's last visit to Madison, in September 2010, drew about 26,500
people who packed the UW-Madison campus. His first visit to the city as
president, in November 2009, was the first to Madison by a sitting president in
59 years.

Thousands line streets

Several senior White House officials were on hand to watch the speech and revel
in the turnout. Valerie Jarrett and David Plouffe both went up in a hydraulic
lift to look over the crowd. Chief of Staff Jack Lew watched from the sidelines,
beaming.

At one point, Kohl, Wisconsin's softspoken retiring senator, approached Lew and
offered him some free advice ? on debate preparation.

After the speech, thousands lined the streets cheering and waving as the
president's motorcade sped through campus on the way back to Dane County
Regional Airport.

Contact Mary Spicuzza at mspicuzza@madison.com or 608-252-6122. Contact Dee J.
Hall at dhall@madison.com or 608-252-6132.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES:  Reporter Doug Erickson and a media pool reporter contributed to this
report.

GRAPHIC: Photos by M.P. KING ? State Journal President Barack Obama acknowledges
a capacity crowd of 30,000 as he arrives Thursday at Bascom Hill on the
UW-Madison campus. Obama's fiery speech injected energy into his campaign after
a lackluster debate performance Wednesday. Umbrellas weren't allowed at the
rally on Bascom Hill, but small cameras were, and they came out in abundance.
Thursday's visit to Madison was Obama's third since he was elected in 2008.
President Barack Obama on Thursday went after Republican challenger Mitt Romney,
a marked contrast with his more muted performance in Wednesday's debate. Obama
repeated claims that Romney's tax plan would squeeze the middle class while
offering tax breaks for the wealthy.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                    Copyright 2012 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
