
                              62 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday
                                 CITY-D Edition

Romney puts the heat on Obama in first debate

BYLINE: By Thomas Fitzgerald; Inquirer Politics Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News Presidential; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1246 words


DENVER - An aggressive Mitt Romney used the first debate of the fall campaign to
accuse President Obama of offering nothing in a second term but more
"trickle-down government" that has failed.

"It's not working," the Republican nominee said. "The proof of that is 23
million people out of work. The proof of that is 1 out of 6 people in poverty.
The proof of that is we've gone from 32 million on food stamps to 47 million on
food stamps. The proof of that is that 50 percent of college graduates this year
can't find work."

Obama, who seemed flat and listless at times during the 90-minute debate, said
that Romney's proposals for massive tax cuts "skewed to the wealthy" and deep
spending cuts would worsen the standing of the nation's middle class.

The president struggled to lay out a vision for a second term except to say that
he would make sure that the deficit would be cut in a "balanced" way that would
avoiding hurting working people. He said he had promised four years ago to
"fight every single day on behalf of the American people, the middle class, and
all those who were striving to get into the middle class. I've kept that promise
and if you'll vote for me, then I promise I'll fight just as hard in a second
term."

He said that Romney was reluctant to discuss details of his tax-cut plans that
he said would cost $5 trillion, ridiculing the challenger's explanation that he
would lower rates, but not the amount of revenue collected because he would cap
deductions and exemptions.

"For 18 months he's been running on this tax cut. Now, five weeks before the
election, he's saying his big, bold idea is, 'Never mind,' " Obama said.

Romney retorted: "Virtually everything he just said about my tax plan is
inaccurate."

Obama and Romney shared the stage in Magniss Arena at the University of Denver
for 90 minutes as equals, the president shorn of the trappings of his office and
facing his challenger from a distance of about six feet.

Independent analysts and even some Obama partisans said Romney did better on the
Denver stage.

"The president got schooled," said Daniel F. McElhatton, a Philadelphia-based
Democratic consultant. "He didn't seem like he cared. He had the opportunity to
close it, to seal the deal, and he didn't do it. . . . I don't understand why he
let Romney control the debate."

For instance, McElhatton said, Obama should have been able to hit Romney harder
on various shifts in the former Massachusetts governor's positions over the
years. "He and his team did not prepare to do that."

Obama "seemed uncomfortable - not confident," said Lara M. Brown, a political
scientist at Villanova University. "He also seemed frustrated with having to
defend his record. I had that sense that . . . he didn't imagine he'd have so
many facts coming at him. He seemed to want to talk theories and ideas, and
share stories about people he believes his policies will help. Romney was more
in command of the facts and was stronger in his delivery."

Bill Galston, a senior scholar at the Brookings Institution, said Romney did
what he needed to do: have a strong enough performance to give himself some
breathing room in the race.

"Romney presented himself as a reasonable man - neither an extremist nor an
ideologue," said Galston, who served in the Clinton administration. "He calmly
rebutted familiar attacks on his proposals. He was clear and forceful, tough but
respectful. . . . He conveyed an impression of competence and experience as a
potential manager of the economy."

But Romney "didn't answer any question," said Mayor Nutter, in Denver for the
debate. "We still don't know what his tax plan is. The president gave a lot of
detail and was specific in his responses."

Even as the two men met here, voters across the nation were already returning a
verdict, with early voting under way in 35 states. The target: a small, elusive
pool of undecided voters that could tip the balance in key states.

For Romney, the debate was probably his best chance in the last month of the
campaign to reverse a tide that has been moving against him.

With less than five weeks remaining until the Nov. 6 election, Obama has pulled
to a small but discernible lead in most opinion surveys nationally and in the
swing states that will decide the election. At the same time, Romney has been
dogged for a couple of weeks by the furor over a leaked video in which he
dismissed 47 percent of Americans who pay no federal income taxes as "dependent
on government" and "victims."

Obama did not mention that remark during the debate. But throughout the evening,
Romney took care to try to undo some of the damage from those words, which had
made him seem callous. He described the struggles of people he has met on the
campaign trail and said, "The reason I am in the race today is there are people
who are really hurting today."

The Denver debate was focused on domestic policy, with six 15-minute blocks
devoted to the economy, health care, the proper role of government, and
leadership. It was the first of three televised face-to-face encounters likely
to dominate the campaign through Oct. 22.

Obama and Romney will also meet Oct. 16, in a town-hall-style debate on Long
Island. Foreign policy is the subject of a third debate, in Boca Raton, Fla., on
Oct. 22. Vice President Biden and Rep. Paul Ryan, Romney's running mate, are
scheduled to debate next Thursday in Danville, Ky.

Presidential debates have produced moments that are considered pivotal: a
haggard Richard M. Nixon next to the vigorous JFK in 1960; George H.W. Bush
glancing at his watch during a town-hall debate in 1992; Ronald Reagan in 1984
answering a question about his advanced age by saying he would not make an issue
of Walter Mondale's "youth and inexperience"; Al Gore sighing and rolling his
eyes in 2000.

Yet political scientists who have sifted through the available polling evidence
have found debates have rarely, if ever, shifted enough votes to decide a
presidential election by themselves.

A Wall Street Journal/NBC poll released Tuesday suggested that 5 percent of the
electorate nationally remained up for grabs, the audience both candidates were
aiming to reach Wednesday.

A new survey of undecided voters in four Western states illustrated the
influence the debates could have on those who remain persuadable at this late
stage of what has been a polarizing election.

More than 7 in 10 undecided respondents in Colorado, Nevada, Arizona, and New
Mexico said they would tune in to the debates, contrary to the image of
undecided voters as uninterested. Just over 40 percent said the debates would
have the single greatest effect on their decision.

Mike Melanson, a Democratic consultant who helped elect Colorado Gov. John
Hickenlooper, said undecided voters are frustrated with partisanship, and are
comfortable seeing both sides of issues - and want leaders who feel the same
way. "They're looking for that authenticity of character," Melanson said.

There was a quick moment of laughter at the debate's outset, when Obama referred
to first lady Michelle Obama as "sweetie" and noted it was their 20th
anniversary.

Romney, smiling, even seemed to make the most of that moment. He offered his
best wishes, and said to the first couple, "I'm sure this is the most romantic
place you could imagine, here with me."

Contact Thomas Fitzgerald

at 215-854-2718, tfitzgerald@phillynews.com, or follow @tomfitzgerald on
Twitter. Read his blog, "The Big Tent," at www.philly.com/BigTent.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
