
                              67 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                    The Record (Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                 First Edition

Romney's prospects shine after debate

BYLINE: Ashok Kapur

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 1098 words


The first 2012 U.S. presidential debate has changed the dynamics of the race to
the White House.

Despite a gruelling campaign to win the Republican nomination, and the negative
ads by all sides, Wednesday's debate in Denver, Colo., was the first real look
the American public has had of Mitt Romney, with an estimated 60 million viewers
tuning in.

Before the debate, an NBC-Wall Street Journal poll showed incumbent President
Barack Obama with a 49 per cent approval rating and Romney at 46 per cent. Among
black, Latino and women voters, Obama had significantly higher approval ratings.
Romney's performance Wednesday, according to postdebate pollsters and tweet
accounts, showed that he won 67 per cent over Obama's 25 per cent among
registered voters, in a poll conducted by CNN.

Romney's ability to turn around the dynamics of the debate and his election
prospects was impressive because he came to the debate with a lot of negative
baggage.

He is a millionaire who holds offshore bank accounts. He pays minimum taxes. He
has not disclosed his tax returns beyond the last two years, and he is seen as
pro-rich and out of touch with the American poor and the middle class.

His gaffes, including criticisms of the Summer Olympics while he was visiting
London in July, raised eyebrows about his diplomatic skill and sensitivity about
America's close ally. A secret tape taken at a May fundraiser showed he was
dismissive about 47 per cent of the population who depend on food stamps and
government entitlements and who were likely to vote with Obama because of his
policy to provide government handouts to the underprivileged.

Wednesday's debate was a strong one for Romney because he established his
presence and his agenda in the national narrative. He was crisp, energetic,
aggressive and gracious with the president.

Obama, on the other hand, was in the view of many observers rusty because he has
not had a real debate in the last four years and his coach, Senator John Kerry
(the 2004 Democratic presidential contender and a political lightweight),
obviously did not prepare him well for political battle.

Obama was also defensive. His negative baggage is the U.S., unemployment rate of
8.1 per cent, the highest in any presidential election cycle for decades; the
economy is sluggish; the deficit and debt is high; the budget is not balanced;
and there has been a failure to find common ground to shape solutions on a
bipartisan basis.

In the debate, Obama looked lethargic, uninterested, and kept looking down to
his notes without engaging Romney and the audience. His message, too, lacked
optimism. There was none of the hope and change message of the 2008 election. He
appeared to say that he had tried for four years and would keep trying. That's
hardly a message that resonates with a population used to thinking about
solutions for the future and immediate issues.

There are critical issues behind the body language. Former president Bill
Clinton, an Obama surrogate and a skilled communicator, has shifted the
narrative away from a referendum of Obama's record, which is his weak spot, to
the issue of a choice for the future.

The Republicans want to make the election a referendum on Obama's four-year
record, but Clinton argues as follows: stay with Obama, build on what the
Democrats have already gained by saving the banks and the auto industry from
bankruptcy; and stay away from Romney's pro-rich policies.

Romney has a different argument: Obama wants to redistribute wealth, as he had
argued in a recording of a 1998 speech that was recently unearthed, whereas the
Republicans want to make the economic pie grow by creating 12 million new jobs
and economic growth on the back of small businesses, which have been the
backbone of economic growth in America.

Romney wants tax cuts to generate job growth, and he wants to fight tax hikes on
the rich. To him the choice is between a big government that Obama seeks versus
private sector-led economic activity.

In the two remaining presidential debates, on Oct. 16 and Oct. 22, the challenge
before the two contenders is to stay connected with the people on key issues:
economic growth, jobs and health care, and to focus on their vision and provide
details to balance the budget and secure entitlement reforms and spending cuts
along with tax reforms. The electorate has to decide if they want four years of
the past or a new path.

Obama is a skilled orator and will likely polish his debating skills and
strategy for the next debates. In the first debate he was hurt by three
elements:

One, he had not had to debate anyone of consequence since the last election and
he was comfortable with the presidential pulpit and ready access to the media,
Hollywood celebrities and the unions.

Two, in the comfort zone of the closed White House inner circle, like the courts
of European monarchs, sycophancy prevails and dulls the senses of the incumbent.

Three, like many politicians, Obama feeds on the applause of his audience, and a
no applause rule in the presidential debate deprived him of the feedback and
energy of the audience.

Now that Romney has taken the issues to Obama, the president will need to regain
the initiative against his opponent and show that the money, momentum and the
votes are still with him.

Romney burst the Obama bubble on Wednesday by arguing that the energy and
initiative of the American people, particularly those running small businesses,
has to be developed and channelled by effective leadership, and not by big
government, which does not create jobs and produces stifling regulation.

Romney also points to the principles of the U.S. Constitution and the important
role of states in handling the Medicare and Medicaid programs.

He points to his record of bipartisanship in Massachusetts when, as a Republican
governor, he reached out to a legislature with a Democratic majority and got
legislation completed.

This, he says, contrasts with the divisiveness of Washington among the two
political parties during the past four years.

Romney has backed Obama into a corner in the first round of the fight, and now
it is up to Obama to regain the centre of the ring by showing that he is
comfortable with economic issues and understands the central role of the private
sector in job creation and economic growth.

The race is on but it is not over. Can the cool "no drama Obama" rise to the
level of a boxing champ or will Romney keep him pinned in the corner?

Stay tuned and watch the next few rounds of this big fight for America's future.

Ashok Kapur is professor emeritus in political science at the University of
Waterloo.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
