
                              68 of 1248 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                             October 5, 2012 Friday

International: US election 2012: Team Obama on the defensive as rival takes
shock debate victory: Democrats say Romney was not candid on tax: Lacklustre
president second best on podium

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskill, Denver

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 934 words


Barack Obama and the Democrats yesterday accused Mitt Romney of dishonesty as
they seek to limit the political damage from the president's lacklustre
performance in the first debate.

Speaking at a rally in Denver yesterday morning before flying to another
campaign event in Wisconsin, Obama suggested the Republican had not been candid
about his positions on tax and other issues on the podium on Wednesday evening.

"Governor Romney may dance around his positions but if you want to be president,
you owe the American people the truth," he said.

The confident, fired-up appearance by Obama was in stark contrast to his
performance in the 90-minute debate, when he seemed disengaged, and at time
frustrated as Romney batted away attacks on his policies.

In one key exchange at the start of the debate, Obama said Romney was planning
$5 trillion of tax cuts and had not explained how he was going to pay for those
without increasing the deficit. Romney flat-out denied this was his policy.

But independent analysts have said the tax cuts he is proposing would total
almost $5 trillion over 10 years, and that it would be "mathematically
impossible" to pay for that solely by stopping tax breaks for high-income
individuals.

Later, during a section on healthcare, Romney insisted that he had an
alternative plan to ensure that people with pre-existing conditions were not
discriminated against by health insurance companies. But after the debate,
senior adviser Eric Fehrnstrom conceded that it would be down to individual
states to introduce legislation to protect people with pre-existing conditions.

Obama defended his controversial changes to expand coverage healthcare coverage,
saying it was almost identical to changes introduced by Romney while he was
governor of Massachusetts.

Romney denied they were identical, claimed Obama's plan increased costs and
reiterated that he would repeal the reform. "In my opinion, the government is
not effective in bringing down the cost of almost anything. The right answer is
not to have the federal government take over healthcare," Romney said.

The Democrats are planning to hold Romney to account on these and other issues,
Obama's chief strategist, David Axelrod, told reporters in a conference call
yesterday. "Governor Romney gave a good performance and we give him credit for
that," Axelrod said. "The problem is that none of it was rooted in fact."
Describing Romney as "devoid of honesty", he also accused the Republican of
lying over his claim that he would regulate Wall Street.

Obama advisers faced questions about why he had appeared tired and uninterested
and his failure to match Romney's aggression. Axelrod admitted that Democratic
supporters would have been disappointed that Obama had not raised strong issues
such as the Republican position on women's rights or the secret video showing
Romney disparaging 47% of voters as freeloaders or his record as chief executive
of the investment fund Bain Capital.

Axelrod said the president had not wanted the debate to turn into a slug-fest
that would have alienated the millions of television viewers.

One of Axelrod's counterparts in the Romney camp, Ed Gillespie, interviewed on
MSNBC, defended Romney's failure to go into the specifics of his tax plans,
saying it would not make sense to box himself into a policy ahead of
negotiations between a president and Congress. "If you negotiate this now, you
and me on the set or candidates in campaigns across the country, you end up
locking people in positions in a political environment that makes it impossible
to govern," he said.

As both campaigns anxiously awaited the first batch of polls, Romney appeared to
have achieved at least one initial reward. Donors who had been threatening to
switch their funds from Romney, giving up on him in favour of channelling money
to Republicans in winnable Congressional races, hoping to take the Senate.

Erick Erickson, conservative editor of the widely-read Red State blog, wrote in
a tweet: "Been on a call with some Romney donors who tonight abandon the idea of
moving their money to congressional races. They'll stay with him."

James Carville, one of Bill Clinton's strategist, conceded on CNN that Obama had
been off his game and could not cope with Romney's aggression. "Romney came in
with a chainsaw. He's trying to talk to a chainsaw," Carville said.

Romney's win increases interest in next week's vice-presidential debate between
Joe Biden and his Republican opponent Paul Ryan. The Republicans will be keen to
keep momentum building with another win before Obama and Romney square off
again, in New York state, on 16 October.

In the debate, Romney was forceful from the start, accusing Obama of repeatedly
portraying the Republican's policies as inaccurate, and he maintained that
momentum throughout. At times, Romney patronised the president, saying that he
did not understand business or accountancy. "Mr President, you're entitled to
your own airplane and your own house, but not your own facts," he said at one
point.

In another powerful attack which is at the core of the Romney message, he listed
unkept promises and told Obama: "You've been president for four years."

One of the biggest surprises was that Obama failed to deliver any of the attacks
that have been successful on the campaign trail and have been used to
devastating effect in television ads in swing states. The main image of the
night will be of Romney, eyes alight, gesticulating from the podium with a
rarely seen passion, while Obama, playing into his image as professorial,
delivered most of his answers with his head down.

Comment, page 40 >=

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
