
                              6 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                             Daily News (New York)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

5 Why didn't Bam cite '47%'?

BYLINE: BY JONATHAN LEMIRE NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire Services

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1448 words


THE DAY after Mitt Romney's momentous debate romp, both candidates barnstormed
in swing states, with the Republican reenergized and President Obama trying to
counterattack his way past his weak effort Wednesday.

The GOP nominee's clear victory left Romneyland crowing, and the challenger
himself confidently looking toward an inauguration in January. Romney's camp
sent out a fund-raising email to the Republican faithful, with a subject line
that perfectly summarized the campaign's next-day giddiness: "Victory in sight."

"What you didn't hear (Wednesday) night from the President is why it is the next
four years are possibly going to be better than the last four years," Romney
said, according to NBC, revving up his party's base at a rally in rural Virginia
that included fireworks and music from country star Trace Adkins.

"He doesn't have a way to explain that, because he has the same policies for the
next four years as he had for the last four years. He said go forward. I call it
forewarned."

The President - punchless, lethargic and at times even dispirited as Romney
handed it to him in Denver Wednesday night - showed renewed fire Thursday as he
tried to stem his opponent's newfound momentum by painting him as dishonest.

"When I got onto the stage, I met this very spirited fellow who claimed to be
Mitt Romney," Obama told a roaring crowd of 12,000 people in a Denver park,
accusing Romney of shape-shifting because his prior campaign message failed to
gain traction.

"The man on stage last night, he does not want to be held accountable for the
real Mitt Romney's decisions and what he's been saying for the last year," Obama
said. He referenced what he described as Romney's plan for $5 trillion in tax
cuts that will largely go to the wealthy - a claim the Republican said during
the debate was simply false.

"He knows full well that we don't want what he's been selling for the last
year," Obama said.

"Gov. Romney may dance around his positions, but if you want to be President,
you owe the American people the truth."

But even Obama's top strategists conceded the President would have to retool his
debate strategy.

"This was the first chance for the President to see how Gov. Romney operates in
these debates first-hand," senior Obama strategist David Axelrod said. He added
that the campaign will have "to take a hard look at this" and that the incumbent
would "have to make some adjustments" heading into Round 2 on Oct. 16 at Hofstra
University on Long Island.

Axelrod and other members of Team Obama faced a flood of questions about what
was perhaps the President's biggest missed opportunity Wednesday - his failure
to question Romney about the secret videotape in which the Republican told
well-heeled donors that he did not care about the 47% of Americans who receive
some form of government assistance.

Axelrod answered that Obama avoided particular topics to keep the debate from
turning into a shouting match, and joked that Romney "may win an Oscar for his
performance."

In a surprise admission on Fox News Thursday night, Romney tried to take the 47%
issue off the table, saying for the first time that the damaging comments were a
big-time blunder.

"Well, clearly in a campaign, with hundreds if not thousands of speeches and
question-and-answer sessions, now and then you're going to say something that
doesn't come out right," he told Fox News. "In this case, I said something
that's just completely wrong."

The first debate was watched by an estimated 67 million people, according to
Nielsen, far more than figures for presidential debates in 2004 and 2008 and
topping by more than double the 30 million who tuned in for Romney's acceptance
speech at the Republican National Convention in late August.

Romney's victory lap featured stump speeches and fund-raising, as he showed
increased fight after standing up to the President.

"(Wednesday) night I thought was a great opportunity for the American people to
see two very different visions for the country," Romney said during an
unannounced pop-in at a meeting of Colorado's Conservative Political Action
Conference.

He reprised a line from the debate, pinning the "trickle-down" label on the
President's economic policy - a branding that Obama has often applied to his
foe's plans.

"I saw the President's vision as trickle-down government, and I don't think
that's what America believes in," Romney argued. "I see instead a prosperity
that comes through freedom."

In a message amplified by his surrogates through a flurry of interviews, Romney
urged his partisans to continue to help him overcome a pre-debate deficit that
had Obama leading in the key swing states, including all-important Ohio.

"You guys are going to have to cheer here, and then go out and knock on doors,
and get people who voted for President Obama to see the light and come join our
team," Romney pleaded. "And if you do that, we'll all be able to come together
and have a wonderful inauguration celebration in January."

The emphasis on spinning the debate's results was intense Thursday as the
campaigns sought to maneuver before the dust settled and polls showed a true
reflection of whether Romney's win would shake up the race. Each side
selectively edited debate video footage to paint an unflattering image of the
opponent.

A Democratic ad showed Romney as pushy and overbearing, constantly talking over
moderator Jim Lehrer. A Republican spot - simply titled "The Smirk" - criticized
Obama's facial expressions and depicted him as arrogant and detached.

But a Reuters/Ipsos poll that surveyed 536 voters following the prime-time
rhetorical skirmish revealed slight gains for Romney. He was seen in a positive
light by 51% of the voters, his first time with a majority positive, though
Obama's number stood at 56%.

Overall the poll showed Obama's 7-point lead had dropped, to 48% to 43%. And
Romney also drew the endorsement of the National Rifle Association, despite
having once signed a ban on assault weapons while he was governor of
Massachusetts.

Obama, however, will be well-armed for the race's home stretch, as his campaign
brought in $150 million in September, an election cycle record, according to the
Wall Street Journal.

The GOP ticket has not yet released its monthly total, but Romney worked to pad
the coffers in Colorado Thursday, attending a fund-raising breakfast at a
country club south of Denver for donors who paid at least $50,000 to share in
the morning-after high.

Obama headed on to Wisconsin, where an afternoon campaign event in Madison drew
30,000 people - the President's largest crowd of the season.

On Friday, a potential game-changer looms - the monthly jobs report for
September.

Recent months have shown sluggish improvement.

GRAPHIC: HOW THE DEBATE WAS WON - LOST.

Some pivotal moments from the debate between President Obama and Mitt Romney in
Denver on Wednesday:

In his opening statement, Obama gave a shout-out to his wife:

"I just want to wish, Sweetie, you happy anniversary," he said.

The audience - warned not to cheer - was silent. Did this awkward moment throw
Obama off his game?

Romney unleashed a blizzard of stats to belittle Obama's handling of the
economy.

"Middle-income Americans have seen their income come down by $4,300," Romney
cried.

Obama never fought back, seemingly accepting the numbers - a pattern that
occurred all night.

Obama suggested Romney's tax plan favored the rich and would explode the
deficit.

"I'm not looking for a $5 trillion tax cut," Romney shot back. "I won't put in
place a tax cut that adds to the deficit."

Obama never pushed Romney to say which tax deductions he would end to replace
lost revenues.

Romney cited PBS as an example of something he would cut, even though, he said,
"I love Big Bird."

Obama did not point out that PBS funding is just 0.012% of the federal budget,
not even a drop in the bucket.

Obama vowed to eliminate tax credits for companies that move business overseas.

"Look, I've been in business for 25 years. I have no idea what you're talking
about," Romney said.-Obama never explained what he meant - making his attack
seem off base.

Romney said he wanted to turn Medicare into a voucher plan for future seniors.

Obama pounced: "If you're 54 or 55, you might want to listen 'cause this - this
will affect you," he said.

Obama cautioned that it could cost seniors an extra $6,000 a year.

A victory for Obama - but it was too little, too late.

Obama ended his closing statement - letting the night pass without talking about
the video in which Romney claimed that he did not care about 47% of Americans
who receive some government help.

Obama had several chances all night to question whether Romney cared about the
less fortunate. He did not.

jlemire@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC;INFOGRAPHIC, Mitt Romney was ridiing Rocky Mountain High on
Thursday after decisively beating President Obama in first debate.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.
