
                              70 of 1248 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                            October 4, 2012 Thursday

Obama played bad defense against an articulate, high-scoring Romney;
President Obama's weary cadence throughout the presidential debate last night
was a sad contrast with Mitt Romney's sunny intensity and articulate flow of
figures and 'facts.' His many good lines appealed to undecided voters or
responded to negative impressions.

BYLINE: Jeremy D. Mayer

LENGTH: 792 words


Like an NFL team sitting on a 10 point lead with 4 minutes left, President Obama
went into his "prevent defense" last night.

This was a really poor choice by Mr. Obama and his campaign for two reasons.
First, he's not ahead by nearly that much in the presidential race. He doesn't
have a 10-point lead; he's up by one or two. Second, as with the prevent defense
in the NFL, Obama's strategy allowed Mr. Romney to make slow steady progress in
arguing his case against Obama.

The president said at the end that this was a "terrific debate" but he may have
been the only one in the arena who believed that it was, at least for him. His
weary cadence throughout the night was a sad contrast with Romney's sunny
intensity and articulate flow of figures and facts, even if some of the facts
were questionable.

Obama doesn't share a stage well. His gift is in soaring inspirational oratory.
There may be no one better at it in his generation. Certainly Romney isn't. But
a debate requires a different skill set. It is unfortunate, perhaps, for Obama
that the nation so recently saw Bill Clinton give a speech at the Democratic
National Convention that was made up of debate-sized chunks of eloquent
argument. When Obama explains something, he frequently sounds pedantic, while
Clinton sounds like he's having the time of his life.

Obama never tried to go on the attack against Romney. No mention of his labeling
47 percent of the nation as lazy shiftless folk who relish government
dependency. No raising of women's issues. No real effort to put the "flip
flopper" label on Romney. When Romney has lost debates in the past, to Ted
Kennedy and others, it's when people expose his acrobatic position taking, and
forced him to defend it. Why didn't Obama bring back Kennedy's wicked line about
Romney being "multiple choice" on abortion?

That's the way you attack Romney. You point out the numerous contrary positions
he's had in public life, and say that he's a man who will say anything to win an
election. A man without conviction or principle. This works to get Romney angry,
and to get viewers to discount everything else he says.

Senior White House advisor David Plouffe defended the president's "quiet
dignity" to cable commentators in the Spin Room after the debate last night. But
that's not what undecided voters - even Obama supporters - saw. Where the Obama
campaign might have been going for reserve and civility, those voters saw
weakness and weariness. Basic campaign strategy says that the candidate who has
a likability advantage is the one who has the better ability to go on the
offensive. If Mr. Plouffe told Obama to be quietly dignified and avoid attacking
Romney as a flipflopper, he should be fired.

We were told Romney would have clever "zingers" that would get the media's
attention. He didn't. Rather, he had articulate brief attacks and points that
were largely substantive. He told moderator Jim Lehrer that he liked PBS, he
liked Big Bird, but he would zero out public broadcasting. He promised to use a
simple test to decide whether to cut a federal program: Is this program worth
borrowing money from China? To those few undecided moderates in the middle,
those few remaining Perot voters, that type of symbolic elimination looks like
courage, even though the number of dollars involved in those proposed cuts would
be ridiculously small.

But that's emblematic of the overall wisdom of Romney's approach as compared to
Obama's. Obama said almost nothing that would appeal to someone who wasn't
already with him. Romney, by contrast, had many good lines that either appealed
to the undecided, or responded to negative impressions wavering voters might
have about him.

Even when Romney told howlers that were factually challenged, Obama was not
really able to effectively challenge them.

As Democratic political consultant James Carville said, it looked like Romney
wanted to be there, and the president didn't. You can't go before the American
people, and give the impression that a debate - one of the core parts of the
presidential campaign - is a chore you are above.

In truth, Romney didn't score any huge points. There were no campaign-shifting
lines or gaffes. But the overall night was almost all Romney. And you can expect
that Romney will get a bounce from this.

Of course, there are still two more debates, and Romney has shown in the past an
ability to make gaffes that could stem his own momentum. And Obama could shake
off tonight, and go on the attack next time. But two more debates like this, and
Obama could find himself relearning how very cold Chicago is in February.

Jeremy D. Mayer is an associate professor in the School of Public Policy at
George Mason University where he also directs the masters program in public
policy.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
