
                              1 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Who won Hofstra's presidential debate: Obama or Romney - panel verdict

BYLINE: Ana Marie Coxguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 2512 words

ABSTRACT

James Antle, Michael Cohen, Ana Marie Cox, Jim Geraghty, Nancy Goldstein and
Cheri Jacobus: Obama had ground to make up after his dire first debate against
GOP challenger Romney. Our pundits decide whether he did it

FULL TEXT

Jim Geraghty: 'It wasn't a bad night for Mitt Romney'

Democrats will be cheering after this debate, with good reason. But the Obama
they wanted to see - aggressive, quick to paint Romney as a re-run of the worst
of the Bush years, flashes of indignant fury that his administration's
credibility is being questioned - may or may not be who those few remaining
undecided voters wanted to see. Obama's performance Tuesday night will do
wonders for Democratic morale, but we may not see much shift in the tracking
poll numbers.

CNN's coverage offers a fascinating live response from undecided voters: judging
from the twin lines on the bottom of the screen (one for men, the other for
women) both candidates did pretty well and voters didn't like it when either man
attacked the other. Of course, candidates in races at all levels wouldn't use
negative attacks if they didn't work; one wonders if the diving lines indicated
the respondents genuinely didn't like the attacks, or whether they've just been
conditioned to know they're supposed to express disapproval of them.

The snap polls, too, pointed to an Obama win in the marginal-to-modest range: in
CBS News' instant poll, 37% said Obama won the debate, 30% said Romney, and 33%
said it was a tie. Interestingly, 65% said Romney won on the issue of economy,
compared to 34% who said Obama. In CNN's poll of registered voters who watched
the debate, 46% said Obama won the debate, 39% said Romney won the debate.

Those results indicate it wasn't a bad night for Mitt Romney, and there was
little chance he would equal the drubbing he dealt the president in the first
debate. But a little more than an hour into the debate, he completely mishandled
one of the most potent issues - how the administration characterized the attack
on our diplomats in Benghazi, Libya. He seemed to know it, as his energy slid
for the remainder of the debate.

Between the questioners at the debate and Frank Luntz's focus group on Fox News,
one of the lessons of the night is that very few people who claim to be
undecided are genuinely undecided. The early questioner who mentioned that
Energy Secretary Steven Chu has said that the overall goal of the nation's
energy policy is not to bring down the prices of gas - no chance he's genuinely
undecided. (Conservative radio talkshow host Rush Limbaugh talked about the
issue and mentioned Chu last week.) One woman who asked the candidates about
unequal pay for women - an easy lay-up for Obama to mention the Lilly Ledbetter
Act. The majority of Luntz's focus group of allegedly undecided voters loathed
Obama's performance, and during a furious denunciation of Obama's presidency,
one panelist let slip the term "bullshitting" on the air. Are we to believe that
guy really doesn't know who he's going to vote for in November?

The "town hall" debate format has been around for 20 years, and it may be time
to consider retiring it at the presidential level. The questioners tend to
freeze under the lights; almost all of the queries are variations of "what can
you do for me?"; the candidates have been conditioned to repeat the questioner's
name and emote sympathy  to the point of overacting; and way too much attention
is paid to the candidates' body language as they get up and down off those high
stools.

Jim Geraghty is a contributing editor to the National Review and writes the
Campaign Spot blog

Michael Cohen: 'Romney's reliance on tired, substance-less talking points was
startling'

Well, that was unexpected.

Going into last night's second presidential debate I fully expected Barack Obama
to do better than he did in the first debate in Denver. But what was so
surprising was not just how good Obama was (and he was quite good), but how bad
Mitt Romney was.

It all started with the first question, posed by an undecided college student
concerned about his job prospects after graduation. It was a softball, one that
a candidate with an even the modicum of an economic plan could knock out of the
park.

And Romney whiffed on it - serving up meaningless platitudes like this:

"I know what it takes to create good jobs again. I know what it takes to make
sure that you have the kind of opportunity you deserve. And kids across this
country are going to recognize, we're bringing back an economy."

There was not a single policy offered to support Romney's confidence. For a
candidate whose entire candidacy is premised on the notion that he will fix the
economy and create jobs, it was a glaring moment. It was like this the entire
evening: Romney's lack of specificity and his reliance on tired, substance-less
talking points was startling.

For example, when asked how he would ensure women received equal pay in the
workforce, Romney bragged about hiring women for his administration when he was
governor of Massachusetts. It was an answer that reeked of tokenism. On taxes,
he continued to offer vagueness about how he'll pay for his 20% across-the-board
tax cut. And bizarrely, he cued up Obama to reference his 47% comment by saying
he wanted to be president of 100% of Americans. It was like he handed the
president the piece of two-by-four with which to hit him.

But his worst moment came during a question on Libya when Romney claimed that
the president had never called the recent assassination of the US ambassador in
Benghazi "act of terror". Obama had, in fact, done just that - a point that
moderator, Candy Crowley pointed out, embarrassingly for Romney. But what I
found most striking about that particular exchange was what came right before -
President Obama's initial response to Romney:

"The day after the attack, governor, I stood in the Rose Garden and I told the
American people in the world that we are going to find out exactly what
happened. That this was an act of terror and I also said that we're going to
hunt down those who committed this crime. And then a few days later, I was there
greeting the caskets coming into Andrews Air Force Base and grieving with the
families.

"And the suggestion that anybody in my team, whether the secretary of state, our
UN ambassador, anybody on my team, would play politics or mislead when we've
lost four of our own, governor, is offensive. That's not what we do. That's not
what I do as president, that's not what I do as commander-in-chief."

This was a very different Obama than the one we saw in Denver - focused,
passionate (but not strident), aggressive (but not obnoxious). On virtually
every answer, Obama did exactly what he didn't do in Denver: he defended his
record and then opened up a tough line of attack against his opponent. There was
nothing more important for Obama to do last night than offer voters a clear
contrast between the two candidates. On nearly every question, Obama did just
that.

It was a strong performance from a candidate whose back was against the wall;
but it was one that's effectiveness was matched only by the failure of his
opponent.

Michael Cohen is a US political columnist for the Guardian and Observer

Ana Marie Cox: 'The highlight was Obama's full-throated defense of reproductive
rights'

There were flashier moments in the debate - the Libya fact-check, the oil
permits body-space infringement - but, for me, the highlight of the debate was
President Obama's full-throated defense of the idea that reproductive rights
"are not just women's issues, these are family issues, they are economic
issues." Up until now, even the Obama campaign has been leaning on the "war on
women" meme as something that is somehow separate from the economy, that "social
issues" are a kind of marginal voter-persuasion issue - on par with "who you
would rather have a beer with?"

I've argued before that almost every so-called social issue is wrapped up in
economics (marriage equality and social stability help communities thrive, for
instance), but contraception has been essential to women's economic equality
for, well, probably ever. But studies of recent history are more concrete:

"About one-third of women's wage gains throughout the 1990s can be attributed to
changing laws in the 1960s and 70s that lowered the age at which women could
legally access the pill."

I'm not sure if this means that voters will make the connection the president
did - that Romney's policies would potentially undo that progress - but I'm
grateful that at least one of the men on that stage understands what I think
most women intuitively do: that when we talk about having control over our
bodies, we're also talking about having control over our lives.

Also, I've never been in a binder, but I am pretty sure I'd rather be able to
sue for equal pay.

Ana Marie Cox is the Guardian's senior US political columnist

James Antle: 'The most disastrous exchange for Romney concerned Libya'

Whatever else can be said, this was a much more spirited Barack Obama in the
second debate. The president was much more willing to challenge Mitt Romney on
his facts, on his record, and on his career in business.

We heard about Bain, the 47%, and outsourcing of US jobs to China. Obama even
unfavorably compared Romney to George W Bush, the president responsible for the
next highest spending binge.

But Romney remained spirited as well. He did not simply allow Candy Crowley to
steamroll him and give the president favorable treatment. He contested Obama's
most politically damaging claims.

Romney was particularly effective in advertising the undeniable distance between
the president's 2008 campaign promises and the rather less impressive 2012
record. Obama still was shy on details of what he would do in a second term,
aside from continuing to present mediocrity as better than what a Republican
would do in office.

Yet the most disastrous exchange for Romney concerned Libya, where he concerned
himself more with talking points and chest-beating than actual problems with
Obama's interventionist approach. Indeed, Obama undermined Romney by
unequivocally claiming full responsibility, rather than blaming Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton.

If that is any indication of how the third and final debate, focusing on foreign
policy, will go, then Romney - the candidate who has appeared to commit himself
to arming Syrian rebels, a more hawkish stance toward Iran, and disapproving of
the the largely Iraqi-mandate withdrawal from Iraq- is in serious trouble.

James Antle is editor of the Daily Caller News Foundation and a senior editor at
the American Spectator

Cheri Jacobus: 'Obama was testy, whiny, overly aggressive'

The question leading up to the second debate between Governor Mitt Romney and
President Barack Obama was "which Obama will show up tonight?"

The abysmal performance by Obama in the first debate was not something the
president's supporters wanted to see repeated. Mitt Romney needed to match his
performance from the first debate. Barack Obama needed to do significantly
better than he did in the first debate.

Both men achieved those objectives. Romney reminded voters of the poor Obama
record of these past four years, and was armed with facts, while Obama claimed
Romney was not telling the truth, yet did not seem equipped to articulate just
where Romney was incorrect.

While Obama at least seemed present and possessing a pulse in the second debate,
he was testy, whiny, overly aggressive, and even asked for - and received - a
highly inappropriate level of help and support from the debate moderator. Mitt
Romney was presidential, just as he was in the first debate. He had command of
the facts, but was repeatedly interrupted by Obama and the moderator.

Obama claimed Mitt Romney was untruthful, but could not be not specific.
However, Romney clearly and correctly stated that President Obama was, indeed,
untruthful in his claims that federal oil production was up. Obama denied it,
and the moderator did not step in to call him on it.

Obama (and the moderator) also claimed he called the 11 September assassination
attack in Benghazi that killed Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three other
Americans a "terrorist attack" the following day in a Rose Garden speech. The
transcript does not reveal that specifically, but in the days that followed,
President Obama on numerous occasions claimed the attack was due to a video that
was deemed insulting to Islam. He has since backed away from those comments and
is now denying he made them, as part of his ever-shifting statements on
Benghazi. The debate moderator let him get away with that one, too.

While Obama likely succeeded in helping to clean up the mess he'd made with his
disappointed base, Mitt Romney did not lose anything, and maintains the momentum
from the first debate.

Cheri Jacobus is a Republican political strategist, pundit and writer

Nancy Goldstein: 'The relaxed, engaging Professor Obama connected the dots'

Mitt Romney isn't entirely to blame for last night's resurgence by Barack Obama.
OK, so he was callow and creepy, but no more than usual (it's hard to shake the
feeling that both he and Ryan were assembled in a basement). The bottom line is
that Obama had a Big Night, one where he hit all his shots.

Gone was the dour and pedantic grumpster that sleepwalked through debate one.
When a young woman asked how his administration intends to address inequalities
in the workplace, particularly around pay, it was the relaxed, engaging
Professor Obama who connected the dots, moving easily from mentioning the Lilly
Ledbetter Fair Pay Act his administration passed in 2009, to making the case
that equal pay for equal work has moved from being a "women's" or "family"
issue, to become a key issue for the middle class, period.

Romney, who punted when asked earlier this year whether he supported the
Ledbetter Act, could only squirm. Worse yet, his longwinded non-response was: a)
a lie, and b) included the "whole binders full of women" comment that has, at
last count, inspired over a dozen social media equivalents of cover bands
including Tumblr accounts, Facebook pages,websites, and several Twitter feeds,
with Romneys_Binder leading the pack at 14,000+ followers.

Like all great competitors, last night's Obama read the opposition well and
created his own shot. While Romney tried to recover his Just for Men cool after
flubbing the Ledbetter question, the president linked women's success in the
workplace to healthcare; healthcare to contraception; and contraception (as well
as mammograms and screenings for cervical cancer) to Planned Parenthood, which
he supports and Romney actively wants to defund. Obama reminded his audience
that while his healthcare plan mandates free contraception as part of standard
insurance, Romney supports repealing that provision through the Blunt amendment.

Obama's move was the debate equivalent of driving past an opponent to the
basket, then dunking on him. Mark my words: women will remember it when election
day comes.

Nancy Goldstein is a progressive writer and communications strategist

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
