
                              5 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Round 2: President Obama turns up the heat in combative town-hall debate;
In a shift from the usual style of a town-hall debate, both Obama and Mitt
Romney used the questions - and the physical space on stage - to directly
challenge each other and, on occasion, the moderator.

BYLINE: Amanda Paulson Staff writer

SECTION:

LENGTH: 1341 words


President Obama delivered a far more forceful performance in his second
presidential debate against Mitt Romney, as he and the former Massachusetts
governor clashed over a wide range of questions from undecided voters.

Debating at Hofstra University in New York's Long Island, Obama and Governor
Romney both had the gloves off in this town-hall debate, as they sparred over
questions that ranged from the economy and gas prices to Libya, immigration, gun
control, and gender disparity in pay.

The outcome was less clear-cut than the debate in Denver, with neither candidate
scoring the huge victory that Romney seemed to in their last encounter.

The big question as the debate began was whether Obama could undo some of the
damage he did two weeks ago in Denver, where he was widely viewed as losing
badly to Romney. In the weeks since that debate, Romney has largely overtaken
Obama in the polls, and is now leading in some key swing states. Obama certainly
delivered a stronger performance this time around, and seemed unafraid of
directly confronting Romney on a number of issues he shied away from two weeks
ago.

"Very little of what Governor Romney just said is true," he said early on in the
debate, in response to criticisms by Romney of his energy policy and statements
that he had reduced drilling on federal lands.

It set the stage for a willingness to spar directly with Romney frequently - an
interaction that often doesn't happen in town hall debates, where the emphasis
is on engaging with the questioner - that happened repeatedly through the night,
as Romney and Obama tussled with each other about their positions and statements
on energy, the Libya attack, immigration, and tax policy.

Romney's strongest moments in the debate came when he characterized Obama's
first four years in stark terms.

"I think you know that these last four years haven't been so good as the
president just described and that you don't feel like you're confident that the
next four years are going to be much better either," Romney told a questioner
who said that he had voted for Obama four years ago but was less optimistic this
time around.

"I can tell you that if you were to elect President Obama, you know what you're
going to get," Romney said, before launching into criticisms ranging from
unemployment and the growing numbers of people in poverty to his failure to
reform entitlements or immigration. "The president has tried, but his policies
haven't worked," Romney said.

Romney was strong at the debate's end, too, though he misfired notably when he
answered a question on gender pay inequity by referring to "whole binders full
of women" that he had his staff in the Massachusetts governor's office bring him
when there weren't enough women candidates for cabinet positions. The phrase
quickly became one of the most mocked of the night on Twitter and elsewhere.

But Obama, who had the most to gain from this debate, came in with a
particularly tall agenda.

He needed to be more energetic than in Denver. He needed to find a way to attack
Romney's character and paint him as a flip-flopper, without hurting his own
likability. He needed to appeal to women voters, who are key to his victory plan
and who polls show may be leaving the president for Romney.

And he had to do it all without seeming like he was overcompensating from his
weak performance of two weeks ago, or that he is desperate.

And, with some missteps, he accomplished most of that agenda.

He used a fairly softball question on pay disparity for women to not only
highlight his signing of the Lily Ledbetter act but also move into a discussion
of contraception and Planned Parenthood - criticizing Romney on both - noting
that "these are not just women's issues. These are family issues. These are
economic issues."

Moderator Candy Crowley, a CNN news correspondent, was nearly as forceful in
this debate as the two candidates.

There were questions before the debate began about the role Ms. Crowley would
play, with both campaigns saying that the agreement stipulated that she would do
nothing more than invite questions from the audience members and keep the
candidates to their time limits, while Crowley said that there was, in fact,
room for her to ask follow-up questions and facilitate discussion.

And in fact, she was a strong presence, frequently interrupting the candidates -
who didn't always listen to her - to bring them back to point or ask them to
wrap things up, as well as asking pointed follow-up questions. In one case, she
asked Romney what he would do if, in fact, the numbers on his tax plan don't add
up (as Obama contends) - a possibility Romney refused to entertain - and in
another case pushing Obama to answer Romney's claim that gas prices shouldn't be
at $4 a gallon if his energy policies were working.

In the most notable exchange, Crowley actually stepped in as a spontaneous fact
checker, as Obama and Romney sparred about whether he called the attack on the
US consulate in Benghazi an act of terror.

Romney jumped on Obama's claim that he stood in the Rose Garden the day after
the attack and called it "an act of terror," saying that, in fact, Obama had
waited 14 days before he used that description.

The two candidates sparred back and forth briefly - as they did several times
during the debate in direct confrontations - with Obama telling Romney at one
point to "get the transcript," before Crowley finally stepped in, saying, "He
did, in fact, sir."

"Can you say that a little louder, Candy?" Obama immediately asked, as some in
the audience applauded.

It was one of the more indelible moments of a debate that overall saw strong
performances by both candidates, and is likely to be replayed often in the
coming days.

It also is likely to be among the most questioned, particularly by Republicans
citing media (and moderator) bias. Even Crowley, speaking on CNN after the
debate, admitted that Romney "was right in the main" in how he characterized
Obama's depictions of the Benghazi attacks, but "just picked the wrong word."
(In the Rose Garden address, Obama did refer to "acts of terror," but only in
general terms.)

For Romney, though, who surely entered the debate hoping to hammer Obama on
Libya, it was ultimately a lost opportunity. What most viewers are likely to
take away is that Romney was called out, and appeared to lose.

The two candidates, who seemed to exhibit a strong dislike of each other on
stage, engaged in a number of confrontations over the night, frequently posing
questions to each other (something else supposedly prohibited in the debate
guidelines) and occasionally entering personal space.

At one point, Romney repeatedly asked Obama, "Have you looked at your pension?,"
as he implied that Obama also had investments outside the US. Finally Obama
replied, tersely, "I don't look at my pension. It's not as big as yours, so it
doesn't take as long."

Obama surprised many viewers in Denver by refraining from mentioning Romney's
infamous "47 percent" comment, in which he seemed in private remarks to dismiss
nearly half the population who don't pay federal income taxes.

On Long Island, it at first seemed that he was going to refrain again from
brining them up - and in fact, Romney used his final question to offer a tacit
rebuttal of his remarks, telling the audience that, "I care about 100 percent of
the American people."

But then Obama, who was awarded the last word, used his final answer to hammer
Romney hard on those remarks, reminding viewers that Romney "said behind closed
doors that 47 percent of this country consider themselves victims."

"Think about who he was talking about," he urged his audience.

It was a strong close for the president, though in the end, Americans viewing
this debate are likely to be split along far more partisan lines in who they
consider the winner than they were two weeks ago.

Most snap polls conducted by news organizations after the debate seemed to give
the victory to Obama, though those polls can have a high degree of error, and
the effects are usually sorted out in the coming days.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
