
                              11 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Obama regains the initiative to win second presidential debate

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskillguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 1233 words

ABSTRACT

President more confident and combative, with Mitt Romney committing a series of
gaffes over Benghazi attack and women

FULL TEXT

Barack Obama secured the comeback he desperately needed in the second
presidential debate against Mitt Romney, finishing the night on top after a
series of fierce clashes in which the two made no attempt to hide the extent of
their personal hostility.

At one point in the 90-minute debate, watched by tens of millions of Americans,
the two squared off, only a few feet apart, talking over one another, jabbing
fingers at one another and accusing each other of lying.

Deriding Romney for what the Obama campaign sees as a belated shift to the
centre, Obama portrayed him as more extreme than George W Bush on social issues,
particularly women's rights.

Obama needed a big performance after his dismal failure in the first
presidential debate in Denver. That 3 October debate was dominated by Romney and
started the president's poll slide, leaving the two in a dead heat less than
three weeks from election day.

Obama will have lifted Democratic morale and may have done enough to slow - or
even arrest - the crisis.

It will be several days before the first reliable polls appear but a snap poll
by CNN awarded the debate 46% to Obama and 39% to Romney, while CBS put it as
37% Obama to 30% Romney.

Obama, listless in Denver, was transformed in the second debate: focused,
animated and combative. The president grew in confidence in the later stages of
the night, while Romney, confident at the start, began to fade.

Obama's campaign team said Obama turned in the peformance it had expected him to
produce two weeks ago.

The former White House spokesman, Robert Gibbs, reinstated to the Obama team as
an adviser, said: "The president knew he did not do well two weeks ago.  He knew
he had to step up his game tonight and Mitt Romney was left looking
uncomfortable".

Republicans countered that nothing the president said will have changed the
dynamic of the race.

Romney and Obama now have a presidential debate victory apiece going into the
final one, usually the most watched of the three, in Boca Raton, Florida, on
Monday.

The two men clashed in the second debate - at Hofstra University, Long Island -
over tax, energy, women's rights, immigration and Libya.

Obama taunted Romney over the vagueness of his plans for tax cuts and deficit
reduction. "If somebody came to you, governor, with a plan that said, 'Here, I
want to spend seven or eight trillion dollars, and we're going to pay for it,
but we can't tell you until maybe after the election how we're going to do it,'
you wouldn't have taken such a sketchy deal, and neither should you, the
American people," Obama said.

But the most politically damaging moment for Romney came when he bungled his
attack on the Obama administration's handling of the assault on the Benghazi
consulate in which the US ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans
were killed.

It should have been an easy one for Romney, after days of shifting accounts from
administration officials who initially blamed the attack on a protest over an
Islamophobic film but have now conceded it was a pre-planned terrorist attack.

Romney accused Obama of flying off on fund-raising trips the day after the
Benghazi killings.

But Obama came back forcefully, accepting the buck stopped with him, not with
Hillary Clinton or anyone else in his administration. "Secretary Clinton has
done an extraordinary job. But she works for me. I'm the president and I'm
always responsible, and that's why nobody's more interested in finding out
exactly what happened." He described as "offensive" Romney seeking to suggest
that as president he was acting out of political motivation over the deaths of
four Americans.

Then, when Romney tried to challenge the president over his assertion that he
had described it as an act of terror on the morning after the attack, the
moderator Candy Crowley intervened to say that Obama was correct. "He did, in
fact, sir," she told Romney, who was unable to counter-attack.

Crowley, CNN's chief political correspondent and the first woman in two decades
to moderate a presidential debate, went on to point out that it had taken two
weeks for the administration to abandon the idea that the attacks were related
to protests over the anti-Muslim video. But her intervention left conservatives
furious, with one Republican strategist describing it as the most egregious
error by a debate moderator ever.

Obama also hit home in an exchange over Romney's investments in China. When the
Republican responded that Obama should look at the investments in his own
pension, Obama, with his trademark grin, shot back: "I don't look at my pension.
It's not as big as yours."

The power of the quip was that it encapsulated the image the Democrats have been
labouring to put across of Romney as rich and elitist, in a different league
from the majority of Americans.

In the final minutes, to the relief of Democrats, Obama also mentioned the
secret video in which Romney dismissed 47% of American voters as freeloaders.
The president had dismayed Democrats when he failed to raise it in the Denver
debate.

The format, a town-hall debate with questions from the audience, makes exchanges
between the two awkward and supposedly encourages civil exchanges. From the
start Obama and Romney dispensed with tradition, rising from their seats to
engage first with the questioners and then one another.

During a discussion about lack of drilling for oil on federal land, the two
could barely contain themselves, confronting one another just a few feet apart,
almost eye-balling one another, with Obama saying "not true" while Romney
insisted it was "absolutely true".

Until then it was thought the animosity between the two was confined to policy
but it became apparent there is also deep personal antipathy. At one point
Romney, almost contemptuous of the president, told him: "You will get your
chance in a minute. I am speaking."  Republicans may view this as Romney
standing up to Obama and what they regard as a representative of the liberal
media, but the risk is that independents view it as rudeness.

In the early exchanges Romney held his own, at one point witheringly telling
Obama that whatever he said he would do in his second term, his first term
suggested otherwise.

But his difficulties began with a question from an audience member over what the
candidates would do to improve conditions for working women. He replied by
talking about his time as governor of Massachusetts when he appointed many women
into cabinet roles and had commissioned a study on women leaders. But he then
delivered an unfortunate line when he said that he had looked through "whole
binders full of women" when seeking to recruit cabinet members as Massachusetts
governor.

Romney also clashed repeatedly with Crowley over the rules and how much time he
was being given to answer questions.

In the spin room afterwards David Axelrod, Obama's campaign adviser, said Romney
had been "cornered and ran out of the room.  It was clear to the American people
he was exposed tonight."

Romney's adviser, Ed Gillespie, said: "The momentum continues for Governor
Romney." Asked about Romney's failure to control the debate as he had in Denver,
he said: "I don't think it changes the dynamic. This was never about style. It
is about substance - jobs - and that has not changed."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
