
                              12 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

ONLY ONE MORE CHANCE FOR A SHIFT IN THE BIG MO

BYLINE: GREG SHERIDAN, FOREIGN EDITOR

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1067  words


Mitt Romney's edge on economics could spell trouble for the US President

THE hardest thing in politics to build, and the very hardest thing to oppose, is
momentum. The Big Mo is almost everything. If you've got it, you seem
unstoppable.

In this fascinating, fluid, quite surprisingly unpredictable US presidential
election we are watching at the moment, the biggest single momentum-creating
event was the first debate between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney two weeks ago.

Yesterday's debate -- for my money a much livelier, more vigorous and
enthralling exchange -- is much less likely to change the momentum.

Before the first debate, Obama was heading for a big win. Romney's challenge
seemed to have fallen below some critical level of credibility.

Obama's overall lead was only a few percentage points, but he had held the lead
for months, and it was slightly bigger in most of the battleground states. It
seemed like the electorate had a settled view of the candidates and Obama was
headed for a coronation.

People say debates don't win or lose presidential elections. But they can do so
if the they fundamentally change momentum.

Nearly 70 million people watched the first debate and the polls indicate that
something like 72 per cent scored Romney a winner as opposed to 20 per cent for
Obama. I must confess this surprised me. I watched the debate and thought Romney
won but only fairly narrowly. Certainly there was no knockout zinger from him,
nor a fantastic gaffe from Obama.

But many analysts, myself included, had underestimated just how soft Obama's
support was. Romney came across as reasonable and personable, Obama as aloof and
disdainful. For tens of millions of Americans the debate was the first time they
had focused on the election, and especially the first time they had focused on
Romney.

Then came the vice-presidential debate, which I scored a win, though a more
narrow win, for the Republican, Paul Ryan, over Joe Biden, as did many of the
polls. Next we had yesterday's rematch between Obama and Romney. I scored it a
draw. Romney was devastating when making the case against Obama's record, but
flubbed a few of his lines. He did not effectively exploit the administration's
weirdly confused and contradictory stories about what happened when the US
ambassador in Benghazi was killed. And he made the odd mistake of a couple of
times directly asking Obama accusatory questions, which simply gave Obama the
chance to speak during Romney's air time.

Obama was extremely effective in painting Romney as a class warrior for the
rich. He was also effective in showing aggression.

Both these tactics were designed to stir up his base, and address the enthusiasm
gap between those who want to re-elect Obama and those who just want to throw
him out. But Obama was weak in not providing any coherent plan for the next four
years.

Interestingly, the CNN poll of registered likely voters who watched the debate
gave Obama a narrow win, 46 per cent to 39. But looking within the numbers,
these are a little less good for Obama than they appear at first blush. Of that
same sample, 25 per cent said they were now likelier to vote for Obama as a
result of the debate, but an equal 25 per cent said they were likelier to vote
for Romney, while 48 per cent said the debate had not affected their voting
intentions at all.

However, the most telling results may be these. Asked who would handle the
economy better, the same sample said Romney by 58 to 40; on the deficit, Romney
won 59-36; on taxes Romney won 51-44. Romney started this campaign as the guy
likelier to handle the economy well and then for a while was successfully
demonised by Obama and the Democrats. He seems to have thoroughly regained his
lead on economic issues. That spells big trouble for Obama.

It may well be that people thought Obama won the debate in a more or less
technical debating skills way, especially by dominating the air time through
personal aggressiveness, but nonetheless thought Romney had the better economic
plan.

The entrails of such polling are endlessly diverting to those of us who are
obsessed by such matters, but less interesting to normal people.

So the big question is: does this debate change the election momentum? The
answer is probably not or, if it does, only a little.

It certainly arrests some of Obama's slide, especially with his own base, and
that is very important. But it goes nowhere towards making Romney the
unelectable extremist, and it still does not provide any plausible Obama plan
for the next four years.

The American polls in the past few days have been fascinating. The
RealClearPolitics average of polls going into the debate had Romney just a
fraction ahead in the national vote, but Obama still a fraction ahead in enough
battleground states to suggest he might just scrape home. But the average of
polls slightly understates momentum because it includes a number of polls that
are several days or a week old.

This is why, again, momentum is so critical. When a stock starts to fall from
its peak value, it is still quite valuable for a while, but you are well advised
to sell it. If the momentum was flowing to Romney it's hard to see this debate
changing the basic narrative arc. Unless, of course, the chattering class is
sufficiently able to talk up the thin Obama win.

That's why Americans talk of the effort to win the post-debate debate, the big
discussion not only over who won the debate but what policy virtues and
character flaws were revealed in the debate.

Certainly yesterday's debate was a wonderfully entertaining spectacle. The two
candidates got close to an almost physical aggression as they several times
tried to invade each other's personal space. It may be that neither was really
trying to win the argument so much as fire up the base by showing they were
sticking it to the other guy. I thought Obama overdid the aggression a bit and
was in danger of looking a little unpresidential. But Romney seemed to
consciously want this, the way he directly asked Obama questions and then
objected to Obama answering these questions during Romney's allotted time.

Altogether, the encounter was less polite, less genial, less gentlemanly than
presidential debates mostly are. Although it makes good TV, that's a pity, a
loss.

There are so many moving parts in this election. The next debate is foreign
policy. Benghazi will be big. It's the last chance for a momentum shift.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2012 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
