
                              13 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                             The Salt Lake Tribune

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Obama goes on attack, Romney counters in second presidential debate

BYLINE: By David Lauter, Christi Parsons And Michael A. Memoli Mcclatchy
Newspapers

SECTION: NEWS; National; World; Local

LENGTH: 1597 words


A newly energetic and aggressive President Barack Obama went directly after his
Republican challenger from the first moment of their second debate to the last,
attacking Mitt Romney's business record, his positions on issues and his
truthfulness during a heated 90-minute encounter.

"Governor Romney says he's got a five-point plan. Governor Romney doesn't have a
five-point plan; he has a one-point plan: Make sure that folks at the top play
by a different set of rules," Obama said during his answer to the debate's first
question.

In his final words, he reprised Romney's videotaped comments, made during a
fundraising lunch, about 47 percent of Americans not paying taxes and wanting to
be dependent on the government.

"When he said behind closed doors that 47 percent of the country considers
themselves victims who refuse personal responsibility - think about who he was
talking about: folks on Social Security who've worked all their lives, veterans
who've sacrificed for this country" and "people who are working hard every day,
paying payroll tax, gas taxes, but don't make enough income."

"I want to fight for them," he said.

Within the debate's first six minutes, Obama had twice accused Romney of saying
things that were "not true."

Romney, who had dominated the first debate two weeks ago, often appeared to be
on the defensive, accusing Obama of distorting his positions. He repeatedly made
efforts to return the debate to his strongest point - Obama's economic record.

"The president has tried, but his policies haven't worked," he said, citing the
nation's continued high unemployment rate. "That's what this election is about."

The sharply worded exchanges bore out predictions that Obama would more
aggressively challenge Romney than he did in their first debate. After a
distinctly lackluster performance in the first debate, which left Democrats
demoralized, Obama was under great pressure to try to create a turnaround.

As the debate became increasingly heated, the moderator, CNN's Candy Crowley,
several times had to admonish the candidates to stay on topic.

As they answered questions from audience members, each man aimed comments at
voters that are key to their election efforts.

Obama offered a long list of policies that his administration has designed to
help women in the workplace and said Romney's plans would deprive many working
women of contraceptive coverage on their health plans, something Romney denied.

He also stressed his support for the bailout of the automobile industry in 2009
and Romney's opposition to it, which has been a key issue in Ohio and other
Midwestern battleground states. Romney's stand would have cost "a million jobs,"
Obama said.

Romney stressed his desire to help small businesses and reduce their taxes and
government regulations. "I know what it takes" to help the economy, he
repeatedly declared.

Romney asked Obama why he hadn't delivered on his pledge to get comprehensive
immigration reform through Congress - a grievance often voiced by Latino
activists. "When the president ran for office, he said that he'd put in place,
in his first year, a piece of legislation" to reform the immigration system. "He
didn't do it."

Obama countered by reminding listeners of Romney's positions on a range of
immigration issues unpopular with Latino voters, including opposition to the
Dream Act, advocacy of "self-deportation" and support of Arizona's strict law
against illegal immigrants, which allows law enforcement officers to ask people
for identification documents if they stop them for other purposes and believe
they may be in the country illegally.

"If my daughter or yours looks to somebody like they're not a citizen, I don't
want - I don't want to empower somebody like that," Obama said.

The contentious debate covered virtually all the hot-button issues of the
campaign, including the recent attack in Libya in which U.S. Ambassador J.
Christopher Stevens and three other Americans were killed.

Obama said he had ordered the State Department to "beef up our security and
procedures" in Libya and elsewhere, and had called for a full investigation of
the nature of the attack and an all-out effort to hold those responsible
accountable.

He also spoke in personal terms about the lives lost, before leaning on his
broader foreign policy resume - mentioning the death of Osama bin Laden, the end
of the war in Iraq and the wind-down of the U.S. role in Afghanistan as evidence
that he means what he says.

"I am ultimately responsible for what's taking place there, because these are my
folks. I'm the one who has to greet those coffins when they come home," he said.

He then sharply criticized Romney for his comments in the immediate aftermath of
the attack. "You don't turn national security into a political issue. Certainly
not when it's happening," he said.

Romney countered by pointing to mixed signals from the administration about
whether the attack was a spontaneous demonstration in response to an anti-Islam
video or a planned attack.

"It was a terrorist attack. And it took a long time for that to be told to the
American people," he said.

But Romney's line of criticism ran into trouble as he insisted that Obama had
not referred to the attack as an act of "terror" until two weeks after it took
place.

Obama responded that he used the word "terror" to describe the attack the day
after it occurred, in an address from the Rose Garden. When Romney attempted to
dispute that, Crowley stepped in to say that Obama was correct.

In answer to a question about how he would separate his policies from those of
George W. Bush, who remains unpopular with many voters, Romney said Bush had
failed to balance the budget, but he would.

Obama responded that "George Bush didn't propose turning Medicare into a
voucher. George Bush embraced comprehensive immigration reform. He didn't call
for self-deportation." On some issues Romney has "gone to a more extreme place"
than Bush, Obama said. "And I think that's a mistake."

Another exchange, over Romney's budget plan, illustrated how aggressively the
president sought to drive home his campaign's criticisms of Romney.

Romney offered a broad outline of his proposals, saying the goal was to simplify
the tax code and ensure that the middle class pay less.

"Under the last four years, they've been buried, and I want to help people in
the middle class. And I will not - I will not under any circumstances - reduce
the share that's being paid by the highest-income taxpayers," he said.

Obama responded with a multi-pronged attack, invoking his rival's 14 percent tax
burden - "when a lot of you are paying much higher" - and recalling Romney's
pledge to Republicans in the primary phase of the campaign that he would also
seek to lower taxes on the top 1 percent. And, Obama said, Romney's budget math
"doesn't add up."

"When he's asked, how are you going to do it, which deductions, which loopholes
are you going to close, he can't tell you," Obama said. "We haven't heard from
the governor any specifics, beyond Big Bird and eliminating funding for Planned
Parenthood, in terms of how he pays for that.

"If somebody came to you, Governor, with a plan that said, here; I want to spend
$7 or $8 trillion, and then we're going to pay for it, but we can't tell you
until maybe after the election how we're going to do it, you wouldn't have taken
such a sketchy deal. And neither should you, the American people," Obama said.

Romney also leaned on his resume, saying that throughout his career - as a
businessman, running the Olympics, and as governor of Massachusetts, he always
balanced the budget. Obama's record is one that "puts us on a road to Greece,"
he said.

"When we're talking about math that doesn't add up, how about $4 trillion of
deficits over the last four years, 5 trillion," he said.



The race between the two men has been extremely close and static most of the
time since late spring. Because of that general lack of movement, the two times
the race has shifted significantly have taken on outsized importance.

The first shift took place during and just after the Democratic convention. With
the help of former President Bill Clinton, Obama pulled wavering voters over to
his side and took a small, but significant, lead nationally and in virtually all
the battleground states. That lead grew a bit larger after Romney suffered from
a series of mistakes that generated two weeks of bad news for him, most notably
the public release of the "47 percent" videotape.

Then came the second shifting point, the initial debate. Voters who had
previously been on the fence said they found Romney forceful and persuasive.
Perhaps just as importantly, Romney's performance revived enthusiasm among
Republican partisans, while Obama's lackluster demeanor and failure to respond
forcefully to his challenger demoralized some Democrats.

The impact quickly showed up in polls as Romney picked up the support of
Republican-leaning waverers. As before, the movement was not huge - an average
of three to four points - but it erased most of the lead Obama had enjoyed, to
return the race to the near-tie that had prevailed most of the summer and to
send many of the president's supporters into a deep funk.

As the second debate approached, Romney appeared to have taken at least a small
lead in at least one major battleground, Florida, and he was pouring resources
into others, particularly Ohio and Virginia, in the hopes of establishing a
clear path toward a majority in the Electoral College. Obama appeared to be
holding on, at least for now, in several key states. Alt Heads:

Obama rips '1-point plan'

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2013

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                      Copyright 2012 The Salt Lake Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
