
                              7 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Obama looks past debate

BYLINE: Scott Wilson;David Nakamura

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1490 words


President Obama sought to put a sluggish debate performance behind him Thursday
with a pair of combative speeches in swing states, as his campaign advisers
acknowledged that he would have to change his approach before meeting Republican
nominee Mitt Romney again on a national stage.

Obama advisers said the president decided before Wednesday's debate that he
would not fight his rival before a prime-time television audience. They
acknowledged that Obama will have to do more in the next debate to defend his
record and hold Romney more accountable for his economic proposals, which the
president sharply criticized Thursday on the campaign trail.

But a wave of anxiety rippled through the Democratic ranks, with many of Obama's
supporters suddenly nervous about their candidate with just over a month left
before the election. Some leading Democrats played down the debate's
significance. Others offered various explanations - including, from former vice
president Al Gore, that Obama had been disoriented by Denver's altitude after
flying in from the Nevada lowlands - for an uncharacteristically poor public
performance from the president.

Attempting to regain the upper hand in what is still a close race, Obama
appeared Thursday at campaign rallies in Denver and later in Madison, Wis., in a
pair of states critical to his reelection efforts. At both events, Obama roundly
criticized Romney as misrepresenting himself and his policies during the debate.

"It couldn't have been the real Mitt Romney," Obama told thousands of supporters
gathered in Denver's Sloan's Lake Park, "because the real Mitt Romney has been
running around the country all year promising $5 trillion in tax cuts to the
wealthy, but the fellow onstage last night did not know anything about that. The
real Mitt Romney said we do not need any more teachers in the classroom, but the
fellow onstage said he loves teachers, can't get enough of them."

Romney also appeared in Colorado, where he described the debate as a "great
opportunity for the American people to see two very different visions for the
country." Later he took the stage with his running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan (Wis.),
in Virginia.

Obama's high spirits on the stump the day after the debate - he mocked Romney
several times for pledging to "fire" Big Bird by cutting federal funding to
public television - belied his listless demeanor of the previous night.

The president's campaign faced an onslaught of questions about the performance,
chiefly: What happened to Obama in Denver? And why hadn't he said the critical
things he did Thursday when he had a television audience of nearly 60 million
people watching?

"He made a choice last night to answer the questions that were asked and to talk
to the American people about what we need to do to move forward and not get into
serial fact-checking with Governor Romney, which can be a tiring pursuit," David
Axelrod, a senior campaign adviser, told reporters.

But Axelrod acknowledged that "I'm sure we will make adjustments," adding later
that "we have to strike a balance."

"You can't allow someone to stand there and manhandle the truth about your
record and theirs," Axelrod said.

David Plouffe, a senior White House adviser, told reporters on Air Force One
that the president will change his approach for the next presidential debate,
scheduled for Oct. 16 in New York. "We are obviously going to have to adjust for
the fact of Mitt Romney's dishonesty," he said.

For some, particularly members of his party, Obama's decision not to defend
himself against Romney's sustained criticism - or draw on some of the successful
attacks his campaign has leveled in recent weeks - made him appear absent from
the contest.

Heading into the debate, campaign officials said, Obama had decided to augment
rather than repeat his campaign advertising that has highlighted Romney's record
with Bain Capital and secretly recorded comments he made that disparaged 47
percent of the country as being dependent on the government.

Some instant polls found that Romney came out the winner. Still, it is unclear
how his success on the same stage as Obama will translate into new support in a
race that has appeared to be tilted toward the president for weeks.

Romney spokeswoman Amanda Henneberg called the defenses of Obama "just like the
president's performance last night."

"The campaign, like the president, offered no defense of the president's
first-term record or vision for a second term, and instead offered nothing but
false attacks, petulant statements and lies about Governor Romney's record," she
said.

For much of his presidency, Obama has battled an impression that he is an aloof
leader, eager to remain above a political process unpopular with much of the
country. How willing he is to fight for his policies remains a mystery to some
of his party's leaders.

Often looking down or smiling thinly during a Romney critique, Obama appeared
out of sorts for much of Wednesday's debate, irritated by the attacks and
uncertain in his responses to them.

The showing appeared so out of character for an orator of Obama's ability that
the theories to explain it Thursday sometimes bordered on the bizarre. Some
Democratic supporters offered that the president had been flustered by Romney's
deceit, or that perhaps he had been pacing himself knowing that two more debates
remain. Plouffe suggested that the media wanted a Romney "comeback" story, so
much so that pundits overplayed Obama's poor performance.

Presidents often have trouble in their first reelection debates.

After nearly four years in office, they are unaccustomed to being challenged and
have a record that their challengers do not. Defensive is often their default
position, as incumbents from Ronald Reagan through George W. Bush demonstrated.

"There is a history of presidents in first debates, and I think we fell prey to
it," Axelrod said in an interview. "And Romney is a great actor in a setting
like that. That doesn't come naturally to the president."

In his earlier conference call, Axelrod emphasized Romney's "performance" while
adding that it was marked by "serial evasions and deceptions." He cited Romney's
description of his planned tax cuts as revenue-neutral, his assertion that he
would replace Obama's health-care law with a plan that would prevent insurance
companies from refusing to cover people with preexisting conditions, and his
support for education spending.

"A day after, I think the question for you and for the American people is really
one of character," Axelrod said.

Reinforcing that message, the Obama campaign released a new television
advertisement Thursday titled "Trust." The ad challenges Romney's contention
that his tax-cut plans would not add to the federal deficit, asking, "Why won't
Romney level with us about his tax plan, which gives the wealthy huge new tax
breaks?"

"Because, according to experts, he'd have to raise taxes on the middle class -
or increase the deficit to pay for it," the ad says.

Although Obama's debate performance energized the Romney camp, how many votes it
will change is unknown.

A Democratic official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the
Obama team, said a "dial-in" poll conducted by campaign officials during the
debate showed that the president won over more "persuadable" voters than Romney
did. The official said that 60 people in a swing state participated in the
survey, and that Obama went from a 1 percent lead among them before the debate
to 4 percent after it ended.

In Columbus, Ohio, a key state in the race, the debate brought consternation to
Obama supporters and reassurance to Romney backers. Few switched sides.

"He was very well-spoken," Obama supporter Jenna Kaun, 31, said of Romney as she
drank a cup of coffee at Pistachio Vera. "But he didn't go into details."

Kaun watched the debate with her husband - a rare undecided voter. By the end,
she still planned to vote for Obama and he remained undecided. "Romney was on
the offense," she said. But her husband, she said, "wishes Romney had more
details."

Romney supporter Rita Foley, 52, said she listened to the debate on the radio
while driving to her daughter's house.

"I didn't see a clear winner. They seemed pretty matched," she said. Yet, Foley
said, "then I got to my daughter's house and she said on TV, Obama looked
anxious."

"It really surprised me," she said. "I thought he was supposed to be this great
debater."

James Reid, 34, an aircraft mechanic, said he wished that the best ideas of both
candidates could be found in a third candidate. For now, the son and grandson of
Ford Motor workers from Detroit said he'll vote for Obama.

"When Romney said 'Let Detroit go bankrupt,' he lost my vote at that," Reid
said. "He's a businessman, and that's who he's looking out for."

wilsons@washpost.com

nakamurad@washpost.com

Wilson reported from Washington, Nakamura from Denver and Madison, Wis. Rosalind
S. Helderman in Columbus, Ohio, contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
