
                              15 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

BYLINE: Karen Tumulty;Philip Rucker

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 1494 words

DATELINE: HEMPSTEAD, N.Y.


HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. - A far more aggressive President Obama showed up for his second
debate with Mitt Romney on Tuesday, and at moments their town-hall-style
engagement felt more like a shouting match than a presidential debate.

The two men insistently challenged each other on the facts, talked over each
other and stalked each other across the stage.

Moderator Candy Crowley of CNN faced a difficult task all night in trying to
keep to the intended format as both candidates insisted on answering nearly
every charge from his opponent, regardless of the time limits.

The president, looking for an opportunity to recharge his campaign after a
lackluster performance at their first debate two weeks earlier, contended that
the Republican nominee's policies and values are extreme and out of touch with
the concerns of the middle class.

Romney, having rallied his supporters with his performance in Denver, was
seeking to keep that momentum going. Neither one held back.

The debate, which was framed by questions from the audience, ranged into topics
that had not been broached in any depth at the earlier one - including
immigration, women's issues, gun control and foreign policy.

In one of the sharpest exchanges of the night, Obama and Romney clashed over
whether the White House misled Americans about the nature of the Sept. 11 attack
on a U.S. diplomatic outpost in Benghazi, Libya.

The tone was established early in the debate, when a woman in the audience asked
Romney to specify the tax deductions he would eliminate to pay for the tax rate
reductions he has promised. As he has in the past, Romney raised the possibility
of an overall cap: "I'll pick a number - $25,000 of deductions and credits, and
you can decide which ones to use."

Obama seized on Romney's lack of specificity as a "sketchy deal" and contended
it was based on "math that doesn't add up." He also noted that Romney, who is
worth hundreds of millions of dollars, pays a lower tax rate than many
middle-income people.

"Well, of course they add up," Romney retorted, citing his successful business
career and the budgets he balanced as Massachusetts governor. "When we're
talking about math that doesn't add up, how about $4 trillion of deficits over
the last four years, $5 trillion? That's math that doesn't add up."

Obama made other references to Romney's wealth. In one exchange, Romney noted
that the president, too, had investments in Chinese companies.

"Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?" Romney said.

"I don't look at my pension," Obama responded. "It's not as big as yours, so it
doesn't take as long. I don't check it that often."

Later, Obama raised Romney's remarks to wealthy donors at a private fundraiser
disparaging "the 47 percent" of Americans who do not pay income taxes. It was a
line of attack that he didn't make in the previous debate, which mystified many
of his allies.

"I believe Governor Romney is a good man - loves his family, cares about his
faith," Obama said. "But I also believe that when he said behind closed doors
that 47 percent of the country considered themselves victims who refuse personal
responsibility, think about who he was talking about."

Obama, mentioning people on Social Security, soldiers and veterans, as well as
students, said: "I want to fight for them. That's what I've been doing for the
last four years. Because if they succeed, I believe the country succeeds."

Romney said the president and his campaign were trying to characterize him "as
someone who's very different than who I am."

"I care about 100 percent of the American people," Romney said. "I want 100
percent of the American people to have a bright and prosperous future. I care
about our kids. I understand what it takes to make a bright and prosperous
future for America again."

The former Massachusetts governor seemed most confident when he talked about
Obama's stewardship of the nation's beleaguered economy.

When a man who voted for Obama in 2008 said his everyday living expenses had
grown too high, Romney told him, "I think you know that these last four years
haven't been so good as the president just described and that you don't feel
like you're confident that the next four years are going to be much better,
either."

Romney cast Obama as a president who failed to deliver on his promises - to
lower the unemployment rate, to cut the deficit, to lift people out of poverty
and to create more jobs.

"The middle class is getting crushed under the policies of a president who has
not understood what it takes to get the economy working again," Romney said,
echoing as he had in the first debate a damaging phrase that Vice President
Biden had used recently, when he said the middle class had been "crushed" during
the past four years.

Romney continued to present a more moderate side than he did during the
Republican primaries, a shift that became apparent during the last debate. When
a young woman asked how he would ensure she could get a job when she gets out of
college, he mentioned government programs such as Pell grants and scholarships.

He also distanced himself from the policies of George W. Bush, the last
Republican president, saying he would balance the budget, crack down on China
and focus more on small business.

Obama, however, contended that Romney is more extreme than Bush.

"George Bush didn't propose turning Medicare into a voucher. George Bush
embraced comprehensive immigration reform. He didn't call for self-deportation,"
Obama said. "George Bush never suggested that we eliminate funding for Planned
Parenthood, so there are differences between Governor Romney and George Bush,
but they're not on economic policy. In some ways, he's gone to a more extreme
place when it comes to social policy."

Obama used many of his questions as pivot points to paint Romney as extreme on a
wide range of social issues - particularly ones that appeal to the female vote,
which is crucial to the president's prospects and which some polls suggest has
begun to slip away from him.

When asked about the equality of women's pay, Obama raised Romney's opposition
to abortion rights and his pledge to take federal funds from Planned Parenthood.
Obama said Romney "feels comfortable having politicians in Washington decide the
health-care choices that women are making."

On Libya, the president said he is "ultimately responsible for what's taking
place there" but bristled at the suggestion from Romney that he had withheld
critical facts about the incident.

"The suggestion that anyone on my team . . . would play politics or mislead is
offensive," said Obama, his voice rising. He noted that he addressed the
American people from the Rose Garden the day after the Benghazi attack and
called it "an act of terror, and I also said that we're going to hunt down those
who committed this crime."

Sensing an opportunity, Romney said, "I want to make sure we get that for the
record, because it took the president 14 days before he called the attack in
Benghazi an act of terror."

Then came Obama's retort: "Get the transcript."

Crowley interjected that Obama did, in fact, call it an act of terror, although
it did take days for the administration to concede that the terrorist act was
unrelated to initial reports of anger at a video that defamed the prophet
Muhammad.

In their earlier debate, Romney had come off better-prepared, energized and
self-assured. The president, on the other hand, seemed disengaged.

"Governor Romney had a good night. I had a bad night," the president later
acknowledged in an interview with ABC News.

The most recent Washington Post-ABC News poll shows the race remains a close
one, with Obama at 49 percent and Romney at 46 percent among likely voters
nationally.

But the enthusiasm that Romney's supporters express for him rose markedly, and a
number of other surveys suggest he is pulling even or even slightly ahead of the
president in some of the swing states that will determine the election outcome.

The debate's "town hall" forum presented a different kind of challenge for the
candidates. It required them to answer questions posed directly by an audience
of 82 undecided voters from the New York area, screened and selected by the
Gallup polling organization.

The pitfalls and opportunities of that format are famous - legendarily so in
1992, when President George H.W. Bush was caught on camera checking his watch,
while his opponent Bill Clinton made the most of his gift of connecting
personally with voters .

That kind of voter interaction of a town hall, televised nationally, has
generally meant that the contenders have less leeway to dodge and fall back on
their talking points.

In that setting, too, the conventional wisdom has it that candidates have to be
mindful of getting too aggressive. It was clear Tuesday that neither Obama nor
Romney subscribed to that more conventional, cautious approach.

Their final debate, which will center on foreign policy, is set for Monday in
Boca Raton, Fla.

tumultyk@washpost.com

ruckerp@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
