
                              17 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 CITY-D Edition

Round 2: Punch and Counterpunch

BYLINE: By Thomas Fitzgerald; Inquirer Politics Writer

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1080 words


An aggressive President Obama confronted his Republican challenger from the
first moments of their second debate Tuesday, attacking Mitt Romney's business
record and accusing him of trying to hide his most conservative positions.

"Gov. Romney says he's got a five-point plan. Gov. Romney doesn't have a
five-point plan - he has a one-point plan," Obama said, in reply to the debate's
first question. "That plan is to make sure that folks at the top play by a
different set of rules."

Obama said Romney had made money as a private-equity investor by investing in
companies that outsource jobs overseas and in corporate takeovers that lay off
workers and "strip pensions" to increase profits.

Romney punched back, pointing out what he said were Obama's broken promises from
the 2008 campaign - to reduce the deficit by half; to get the unemployment rate
down to 5.4 percent; to introduce an overhaul of immigration law, and to offer a
plan to save Medicare and Social Security.

"I think you know better," Romney said to a man who had asked Obama why he
should vote to reelect him. "I think you know that these last four years haven't
been so good as the president just described and that you don't feel like you're
confident that the next four years are going to be much better either. . . . We
just can't afford four more years like the last four years."

Throughout the debate, Obama accused Romney of saying things that were "not
true."

Obama needed to show some fight after his lackluster performance - and Romney's
forceful presentation - in their first debate.

Tuesday night's 90-minute town hall debate was held at Hofstra University in
Hempstead, N.Y., exactly three weeks before Election Day. Seated on bar stools,
from which they often left to pace the stage, Obama and Romney fielded questions
posed by a pool of 80 undecided Long Island voters chosen by the Gallup polling
organization.

Since the president turned in a listless performance in the first debate Oct. 3
in Denver, the rematch had assumed outsize importance, with pressure on Obama to
rebound. In Denver, Romney came out swinging and gave his campaign a much-needed
jolt in the race. "I had a bad night," Obama said later.

Recent polls show a dead heat, and a Gallup/USA Today poll published Tuesday had
Romney leading Obama by 4 percentage points in 12 battleground states. The race
even appears to be tightening in states where Romney hasn't spent any
advertising money, such as Pennsylvania, where a new poll Tuesday showed Obama's
double-digit lead had shrunk to 4 percentage points.

Obama lived up to his aides' promises of a more assertive president. His
campaign believes Romney got away with softening some of his more conservative
positions and avoiding details of proposed policies, such as a plan to cut
income taxes 20 percent beyond the Bush-era rates.

Obama argued that Romney's plan would cost up to $8 trillion, including the tax
cuts and promised increases in defense spending.

Noting that Romney was a successful businessman, Obama told him, "If somebody
came to you, Governor, with a plan that said, here, I want to spend $7 or $8
trillion, and then we're going to pay for it, but we can't tell you until maybe
after the election how we're going to do it, you wouldn't take such a sketchy
deal - and neither should you, the American people, because the math doesn't add
up."

Obama's longstanding lead in national and battleground-state polls, though
narrower at some points than others during this campaign, has been built largely
on a huge advantage with women voters. But some recent polls show Romney has
closed the gender gap considerably after his Denver performance.

To a question about pay equity for women, Obama reminded voters that he had
signed the Lily Ledbetter Act and said Romney "feels comfortable having
politicians in Washington making decisions about women's health-care choices."
He cited Romney's call to end federal funding for Planned Parenthood and support
for legislation that would allow employers to deny coverage for contraception in
health care plans.

"These aren't women's issues - they're family issues, economic issues," Obama
said.

Romney described his hiring record as governor of Massachusetts, when he
insisted more women be considered for cabinet jobs and said that the best
equality measure was a growing economy.

"What we can do to help young women and women of all ages is to have a strong
economy, so strong that employers that are looking to find good employees," he
said.

Topics ranged widely. The final debate, Monday in Florida, will be devoted to
foreign policy.

The first debate drew an audience of 67 million, Nielsen says, the most for any
presidential debate since 1992.

The two tangled over the attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, a
point the Republican has pressed to try to argue the administration's foreign
policy is weak.

Romney said it took Obama too long to admit the episode was a terrorist attack,
but Obama said he had called it "an act of terror" the day after, in an
appearance in the Rose Garden outside the White House. "Check the transcript,"
he said.

When moderator Candy Crowley of CNN said the president had in fact done so,
Obama prompted: "Say that a little louder, Candy."

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has taken responsibility for the deaths of
Ambassador L. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans, but Obama said
bluntly, "I'm the president and I'm always responsible."

Romney said it was "troubling" that Obama went to a campaign event in Las Vegas
on the day after the attack in Libya.

Obama bristled, saying it was offensive for anyone to allege that he or anyone
in his administration had misled people for political gain. "That's not what I
do," he said.

The candidates repeatedly talked over each other. One intense exchange came when
Obama said Romney still had investments in companies that have outsourced U.S.
jobs to China.

Romney replied: "Any investments I have over the last eight years have been
managed by a blind trust. And . . . Mr. President, have you looked at your
pension?"

Obama began, "Candy -"

Romney, moving toward Obama on the stage, persisted: "Have you looked at your
pension?"

Obama: "I've got to say. . ."

Romney: "Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?"

Laughing, Obama replied: "You know, I don't look at my pension. It's not as big
as yours, so it - it doesn't take as long."

Contact Thomas Fitzgerald

at 215-854-2718 or tfitzgerald@phillynews.com.




LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
