
                              18 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 CHASE EDITION

High-energy, no economy of words;
Which TV moments matter to voters on fence: Ads or debates?

BYLINE: Susan Page, @susanpage, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 1061 words


Call it fight night.

That low-key, low-energy Barack Obama whose performance was  widely panned after
the first presidential debate two weeks ago apparently stayed back in Denver.
With his ambitions for a second term on the line, the president talked faster,
pushed back harder and challenged Mitt Romney with more specifics in their
second encounter on Long Island Tuesday.

Romney was forced to defend and explain his record as governor of Massachusetts
and the promises he made during the Republican primaries on immigration, taxes
and more. "Very little of what Gov. Romney just said was true," Obama declared
during a dispute on energy exploration that became a toe-to-toe confrontation in
which each repeatedly interrupted the other.

Romney was aggressive, too. At one point, Romney walked over to Obama and asked
repeatedly if he had looked at his pension plan, which, Romney said, included
investments in China.

"It's not as big as yours," Obama replied to laughter.

A few moments on TV more than likely will determine who is elected president in
21 days. The question is which moments: The most memorable exchanges from the
three 90-minute debates between Obama and Romney? Or the impact from a flood of
30-second ads both sides are airing?

Strategists in both campaigns viewed the second debate as a pivotal event in a
contest that is once again strikingly close. After a year-long campaign, the
town-hall-style forum at Hofstra University was probably the best remaining
opportunity for Romney to build on the positive impression he made in the first
debate and for Obama to regain the momentum he lost there.

Obama came across as more engaged and presidential than he did in Denver. He hit
themes he failed to mention in the first debate. In the first question from a
college student about jobs, he managed to mention Romney's opposition to the
auto bailout. He made comments aimed at female voters, mentioning his debt to
his single mother and his grandmother and his aspirations for his two daughters.

In a regretful tone, Romney expressed disappointment in the president's tenure,
a sentiment heard from some voters who had supported Obama in 2008 with high
hopes. "If you elect President Obama you know what you're going to get," he
said. "You'll get a repeat of the last four years." Romney called Obama "great
as a speaker" but, in effect, a failure as a president in delivering prosperity
for the middle class.

Still, in the battleground states, the debates are framed by an unprecedented
onslaught of political advertising, almost all of it negative. On local stations
from Orlando to Columbus, Richmond to Las Vegas, airtime from now until election
eve is sold out and campaign ads are running back-to-back.

It is easier to skip the debates than avoid the spots.

The first debate drew a TV audience of 67 million, Nielsen says, the most for
any presidential debate since 1992. But the paid ads have reached more. In a USA
TODAY/Gallup Poll of swing states, nearly eight of 10 residents in a dozen top
battlegrounds say they have seen an ad for Obama or Romney in the past three
days. (So did 63% of those in non-swing states.)

For most, it wasn't a positive experience. A 55% majority in the battlegrounds
say this year's  ads have "turned them off to the campaign." Just a third say
they have made them "feel more excited" about it.

That said, voters in the battlegrounds acknowledge that the ads are influential.
Six in 10 say the campaign ads they've seen have made them more certain about
whom they'll support. Fewer than one in five say the ads made them less certain.

Obama ads in particular seem to have made an impression: 67% of Democrats say
the ads solidified their vote, a bit more than the 60% of Republicans who say
the same.

The poll of 1,023 registered voters was taken Oct. 5-11 in Colorado, Florida,
Iowa, Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Virginia and Wisconsin. The margin of error is +/-4 percentage
points.

In this campaign more than previous ones, the ads and the debates seem to be
filling divergent roles. Almost all of the TV ads have been negative -- that is,
devoted to blasting the other candidate, not boosting your own. Romney and his
allies have tried to tie Obama's policies to high unemployment and home
foreclosures. Obama's team portrays Romney as a plutocrat with extreme
conservative policies and little empathy for regular folks.

A study by the Wesleyan Media Project released earlier this month reported that
fewer than 8% of the presidential ads in the previous three weeks had been
positive, mentioning only the candidate it backed. That's much lower than in
2000, when 30% of the ads were positive, or in 2008, when 19% were.

In some ways, the debates are designed to be an antidote to ads. On a small
stage,  surrounded on three sides by an audience of about 80 undecided or
"persuadable" voters, they tried to make the case for themselves. Obama touted
his record as president; Romney bragged about his record as Massachusetts
governor and head of the Salt Lake City Olympics.

But they also turned nearly every question to an attack on the other side.
Romney criticized Obama for heading out of Washington for political fundraisers
on the day after the U.S. ambassador was assassinated in Libya. Obama blasted
Romney for making what he called unpresidential efforts to capitalize on the
unrest.

Their exchanges weren't exactly spontaneous -- each candidate spent days at "
debate camps" rehearsing quips and practicing answers -- but they are less
scripted than almost anything else the candidates do during a campaign. "An
unfiltered moment," Republican National Chairman Reince Priebus said beforehand.

But in the end, says Mitchell McKinney of the University of Missouri, "the power
of the 30-second spot may well trump the effect of debates."

Debates can help maintain or change momentum, as the first debate boosted Romney
at Obama's expense, and as the second debate may revive Obama's prospects. But
after next week's final debate in Florida, focused on foreign policy, the
candidates and their allies will intensify their campaigns on the airwaves.
Romney raised $170 million last month and Obama $181 million, both records for
this campaign cycle, with appeals to supporters to help pay for even more of
those ads.

When the debates are over, the ads will be on the air.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
