
                              19 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                   The New Hampshire Union Leader, Manchester

                 Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Romney, Obama come out swinging

BYLINE: Tim Buckland, The New Hampshire Union Leader, Manchester

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 901 words


Oct. 17--President Barack Obama, seeking to rebound from a lackluster debate
performance earlier this month, went on the offensive early during Tuesday
night's debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y.

"Governor Romney says he has a five-point plan," Obama said, referring to his
Republican opponent, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney. "Governor Romney
doesn't have a five-point plan. He has a one-point plan to make sure the people
at the top play by a different set of rules."

Romney, at each turn, fought back with jabs at Obama's policies on jobs and
energy, then later challenged Obama's reaction to the attack on the American
consulate in Libya, in which four Americans were killed.

"The President's policies have been exercised over the last four years and they
haven't put Americans back to work," Romney said.

Obama said he would look to save and help businesses create jobs, similar to the
bailouts of the auto industry that are credited with saving General Motors and
Chrysler.

"When Governor Romney said we should have let Detroit go bankrupt, I said I'm
going to bet on the American auto workers and American auto industry and it's
come roaring back," Obama said.

Later in the debate, Obama and Romney went back and forth over how the
administration handled the attacks in Libya.

Romney accused Obama of either misleading people about or not knowing the cause
of the attack, saying administration officials initially blamed the attacks on a
protest over a video demeaning Muslim people, then later called it an act of
terror.

Obama said he spoke at the Rose Garden of the White House the day after the
attack and said, "that this was an act of terror."

Romney sprang out of his seat and challenged the President's claim.

"You're saying that you called it an act of terror the day after? I just want to
be sure we have that on the record," Romney said.

Obama encouraged the debate moderator, Candy Crowley of CNN, to "check the
transcripts."

According to the official transcript of the speech on the White House website,
Obama said in the speech: "No acts of terror will ever shake the resolve of this
great nation, alter that character, or eclipse the light of the values that we
stand for."

The two mixed it up directly at several other points in the debate, including
when they argued over the administration's energy policies.

After Obama said energy production has increased in the United States, Romney
said the growth was in spite of the President's policies.

"None of it happened on federal land," Romney said. "The administration has cut
permits in half."

"Very little of what Governor Romney just said is true," Obama said.

"How much did you cut permits on federal land?" Romney said, turning to the
President.

When Obama started speaking, Romney interrupted him, asking the same question.

"Do you want me to answer the question? I'll answer the question," Obama said,
facing his opponent directly.

"Production on government land is down," Romney said later.

"That's not true. It's just not true," Obama said.

"I don't think anyone believes that you would fight for oil, coal or natural
gas," Romney said.

The two also disagreed on taxes and immigration reform.

Obama said Romney wants to cut tax rates across the board by 20 percent, but
won't specify how he'll make up for the lost revenue, except for targeting cuts
in federal aid to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and to Planned
Parenthood.

"When he's asked how he's going to do it, which loopholes and deductions he's
going to cut, he can't tell you," Obama said. "We haven't heard any specifics
from Governor Romney other than Big Bird and eliminating funding for Planned
Parenthood."

He said Romney's plan would add $5 trillion in deficits and said Romney, as an
investor, would be suspect if someone came to him with a proposal to spend that
much money without a concrete plan on how to make the money back.

"You wouldn't have taken such a sketchy deal," Obama said.

Romney criticized Obama for failing to get immigration reform done, despite
enjoying a "super majority" of Democrats in Congress during his first two years.

"Why, if he said that in his first year, he would introduce legislation for
immigration reform, he didn't do it," Romney said. "He won't answer that
question."

Obama did not address the question directly, saying he took steps to increase
border security while championing legislation later in his term, called the
DREAM Act, that would provide a direct path to citizenship for people brought to
America as children.

The debate had at least one light-hearted moment.

During an argument over the country's relationship with China, Obama said Romney
would not be the ideal man to be "tough" on China and he repeated a statement in
campaign ads that Romney personally invested in companies that outsourced jobs
to China.

Romney countered that the investments in question were made by his blind trust
and that Obama would likely see similar investments if he looked at his pension.

"Have you looked at your pension?" Romney asked Obama several times, before the
President replied, drawing laughter from the debate audience: "No, I haven't
looked at my pension. It's not as big as yours."

Tim Buckland may be reached at tbuckland@unionleader.com

___ (c)2012 The New Hampshire Union Leader (Manchester, N.H.) Visit The New
Hampshire Union Leader (Manchester, N.H.) at www.unionleader.com Distributed by
MCT Information Services

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20121017-1MN-Romney-Obama-come-out-swinging-1017-20121017

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1MN


                                 Copyright 2012
