
                              22 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                            October 16, 2012 Tuesday

Obama and Romney debate again: strategies for the town-hall style format

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskillguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 1148 words

ABSTRACT

The president badly needs a win or a draw in Tuesday night's debate - but how
will the new format affect his chances?

FULL TEXT

Barack Obama cannot afford another bad debate in Long Island tonight after his
dismal performance in Denver a fortnight ago that opened way for Mitt Romney's
comeback.

Obama needs to come out with either a win or a draw. His campaign team said he
is better-prepared and energised. But the Romney camp, which showed itself to be
adept in preparing for the Denver debate, will have anticipated this.

The president faces an additional obstacle tonight, the format being different
from the Denver one, with questions coming from the audience rather than a
single journalist.

Obama needs to hit Romney hard but the town-hall style debate complicates his
task. In this format, Obama and Romney will be answering questions mainly from
voters in the audience, making it more difficult to be evasive and combative.

The tradition is to be civil, though in 2004 there were strong exchanges between
then president George W Bush and John Kerry over the Iraq war.

The audience in the hall and those watching at home will expect answers to
questions rather than the politician's trick of switching almost immediately to
another topic.

With the president and Romney theoretically free to wander round the stage in
this format, there is also more emphasis on body language than there was when
the two are stuck at a podium or in their seats. Romney's team said the
candidate has devoted a lot of attention in his preparations to this.

A Pew poll published Monday showed 41% expected Obama to do better and 37%
Romney, a change from before the Denver debate when 51% expected Obama to do win
and 29% Romney.

The format

Town-hall debates on the campaign trail and in at least one past presidential
election had a element of spontaneity about them. These days they are more
controlled.

Gallup chooses 80 questioners representing a cross-section of likely voters, the
questions screened in advance, and the moderator, Candy Crowley, chooses a dozen
or more from the 80.

After a question is asked, Obama and Romney have two minutes each to respond
followed by exchanges.

The two campaigns jointly approached the organisers on Friday to protest over
comments made by Crowley that she saw her role as being more than just a fly on
the wall and intended to ask follow-up questions. The campaigns wanted an
assurance the debate is primarily for the audience to ask questions and that
Crowley would not seek too big a role.

Crowley, a veteran news reporter and anchorwoman who likes to generate news, is
unlikely to be fazed by this. Expect her to vigorously pursue follow-up
questions.

The strategies

Obama was left looking in the Denver debate at times as if Romney was the
president and he was the challenger. He needs to be assertive in a way he failed
to be in Denver.

To lift the morale of Democrats still upset over his previous outing, he has to
go negative for at least some of the debate in spite of the limitations of the
format.

His campaign team has hinted he will be aggressive, digging into areas where
Romney is seen as weak: the 47% comment from the secret video, his record at
Bain Capital, and his vague tax and deficit-reduction plans.

He also has to convey pride, as Bill Clinton succeeded in doing at the party
convention and vice-president Joe Biden did to some extent in last week's
debate, in the achievements of his first term and to signal what he will do in a
second.

It is easier for Romney. With one win behind him, he can afford to settle for a
draw. He will seek to consolidate his march towards the centre ground. He can
exploit Obama's vulnerabilities, especially his administration's conflicting
accounts of what happened in the Benghazi consulate attack.

The issues

With the questions coming from the audience rather than the moderator, what
issues might come up are theoretically unpredictable. But, given they are
screened first, the chances are that key domestic and foreign issues are almost
certain to crop up.

In the months running up to the election. the widespread consensus was that
foreign affairs was unlikely to play much part in a campaign dominated by
unemployment. But the death of US ambassador Chris Stevens and three others in
the Benghazi consulate attack is an emotive issue, one on which Obama is
vulnerable because of conflicting statements from his administration.

While Obama is at the mercy of the audience, he has to try to find a way - if it
is not raised by one of the questioners - to get in comments about Romney's 47%
remark about freeloading Americans, which he failed to do in Denver. He will
also want to press more forcefully than he managed in Denver on how Romney plans
to both cut taxes for the wealthy and cut the deficit at the same time.

Romney will seek to push the message that, as a former businessman, he is better
suited for stewardship of the economy than Obama, though the president can
respond by pointing to the latest unemployment figures showing a drop to 7.8%.

Preparations

Obama has devoted more time to preparation, having cleared his diary since
Friday, apart from one dinner engagement that evening. He has been holed up at a
resort near colonial Williamsburg, Virginia, since Saturday and will head to
Hempstead, Long Island, this afternoon for the debate.

As with the preparations for the first debate in Denver, senator John Kerry is
playing the role of Romney and Obama's head of communications, Anita Dunn, is
playing Crowley.

Romney practised in Ohio on Saturday night and since Sunday at a house outside
Boston, Massachusetts, with senator Rob Portman as Obama and, in a piece of
gender-switching, one of Romney's aides Peter Flaherty as Crowley.

The Republican presidential candidate devoted a lot of time in the run-up to
Denver to what he said and how he would say it but his campaign team said he is
looking a lot at body language this time round, given the freedom to move round
the stage.

Past town-hall style presidential debates

The town-hall style was introduced for televised presidential debates on October
15, 1992 and had an immediate impact. Unlike tonight, the questions were not
screened in advance.

Then president George Bush Sr was knocked off his stride when a woman asked him
about the personal impact of the national debt. He looked at his watch as she
began her question, a gesture that was interpreted as being impatient and went
down badly among television viewers.

He compounded the error by offering up a jumbled reply whereas Bill Clinton
moved across the stage towards the questioner and spoke about the impact he had
witnessed on people in Arkansas, where he was governor.

In 2004, George W Bush appeared flustered when asked to name three mistakes he
had made as president.

Final debate

The third and final presidential debate will be held next Monday at Lynn
University, Boca Raton, Florida.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
