
                              24 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

2nd debate puts focus on women;
In angry exchanges, Romney and Obama reach out to crucial bloc

BYLINE: BRIAN KNOWLTON and MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1303 words

ABSTRACT

Obama and Romney spend extra time in emotional exchanges trying to appeal to an
important voting bloc.

FULL TEXT

Mitt Romney was trying to show his support for women in a remark during his
latest debate against President Barack Obama. Instead, he provoked an angry
debate among women who saw the remark as a clumsy snub as the candidates battled
for the vital support of a key voter group.

Their 90-minute debate on Tuesday was vigorously fought - bitterly so at times,
with the men circling each other warily on stage, or glaring across the short
space separating them. And even as each man sought to appeal to female voters,
some of those voters said later that they were put off by the force of the
confrontation.

Instant polls taken after the debate, held in Hempstead, New York, favored Mr.
Obama. Surveys by CBS and CNN gave him a seven-point edge over his Republican
challenger. The president did even better in polls in the all-important swing
states for the election on Nov. 6.

Mr. Romney, the acknowledged winner of the first debate, found himself under far
more direct and regular attack on Tuesday. He fought back, often effectively,
especially on economic issues. He repeated his campaign mantra that the United
States could not afford another four years like the ones Mr. Obama has presided
over. (The last debate will be on Monday in Florida.)

But there was no mistaking the focus of the candidates on women. The president
went out of his way to mention Mr. Romney's pledge to eliminate financing for
Planned Parenthood, saying that it not only would affect women's health services
but also impose an economic burden on families during tough times.

Mr. Romney sought to connect the interests of women to the broader issue of the
economy's sluggish recovery, suggesting that he could do better for struggling
families - and especially women - if he were in the White House. ''We don't have
to live like this,'' he said. ''We can get this economy going again.''

But perhaps the most memorable exchange came when Mr. Romney was asked at the
town-hall-style debate whether he favored pay equality. He sidestepped that
question, instead describing his efforts to hire women while governor of
Massachusetts.

He said that while forming his cabinet, no applications from women had reached
him.

''I said, 'Well, gosh, can't we find some women that are also qualified?' And so
we took a concerted effort to go out and find women who had backgrounds that
could be qualified to become members of our cabinet,'' Mr. Romney said.

The result, he said, was that ''whole binders full of women'' were presented to
him. Social media exploded in response. The phrase ''whole binders full of
women'' became an Internet sensation. A Facebook page, ''Binders Full of
Women,'' quickly drew nearly 300,000 ''likes,'' and the comment was a hit on
Twitter and on a mocking Tumblr page.

Boston newspapers reported that it was women's groups that brought lists of
qualified women to the governor's office unbidden, with no such request from
him.

Jesse Mermell, who ran MassGAP, the nonprofit women's advocacy group in
Massachusetts that compiled resumés of potential female employees for Mr. Romney
, said he should not have needed the group's research.

''Why did Mitt Romney need binders full of resumés?'' Ms. Mermell said. ''Were
there no women in his 25 years of experience that he had worked with who he
thought might be qualified?''

But the papers and women's groups did acknowledge that he hired significant
numbers of women, particularly in his first years in office.

Even as the debate concluded, the Romney campaign was releasing a new ad seeking
to portray him as a moderate on women's issues, stressing that the Republican
candidate does not oppose contraception and believes abortion should be legal in
some cases.

''Turns out, Romney doesn't oppose contraception at all,'' a woman in Mr.
Romney's new campaign ad says. ''In fact, he thinks abortion should be an option
in cases of rape, incest or to save a mother's life.''

The ad is Mr. Romney's most aggressive attempt to rebut efforts by the Obama
campaign to paint him as extreme on women's rights. This strategy is not without
risk. Many socially conservative Republicans have long been wary of Mr. Romney,
who as a candidate for U.S. Senate said that abortion should be ''safe and
legal'' and touted his pro-gay rights positions.

Mr. Obama carried women voters by a substantial margin over Senator John McCain
in 2008. They helped him offset a deficit among male voters. Most polls this
year have given Mr. Obama a sizable lead among women, though a Gallup poll this
week suggested that Mr. Obama's advantage there had evaporated. Mr. Obama's top
strategists, citing other surveys, disputed that.

Mr. Romney has made increasingly clear appeals to women. As someone who has said
he opposes legalized abortion, he surprised some supporters last week when he
said, ''There's no legislation with regards to abortion that I'm familiar with
that would become part of my agenda.'' A Romney spokeswoman later insisted that
he remained strongly anti-abortion.

Both candidates immediately returned to the campaign trail after the debate. Mr.
Romney's running mate, Paul D. Ryan, tried to keep the focus on foreign policy,
again attacking the president's handling of the violence in Benghazi, Libya.

Mr. Ryan defended Mr. Romney's insistence Tuesday that Mr. Obama had waited two
weeks before describing as terrorism the violence at the U.S. diplomatic mission
in Benghazi, in which four Americans died.

Mr. Romney seemed startled when Mr. Obama declared that he had in fact done so
the day after the attack, and he asked the president to repeat the claim; the
moderator, Candy Crowley of CNN, then affirmed that he had done so. And to be
sure everyone had heard, Mr. Obama asked her to repeat that.

But Mr. Ryan, who was campaigning in Ohio, took issue with Mr. Obama's original
remark, saying on ABC: ''It was a passing comment about acts of terror in
general, it was not a claim that this was a terrorist attack. Nobody believes
that that Rose Garden speech from the president was suggesting that that was an
act of terror.''

In fact, the president used the phrase ''act of terror'' that day, though his
reference was somewhat generic.

Mr. Romney and other Republicans have complained bitterly that the
characterization of the attack from other White House officials has shifted, and
they have demanded explanations and accountability.

The anger that gushed from both sides during and after the debate underscored
the huge stakes at hand, with Mr. Obama fighting to recover from a listless
first debate and Mr. Romney hoping to maintain newfound momentum in what has
become an extraordinarily close race. In their struggle, the women's vote is
essential.

Mr. Obama on Tuesday seized every opportunity to assert that Mr. Romney would
eliminate financing for women's health services, block access to contraceptives,
oppose equal pay and undermine the economic recovery for families in which women
are the breadwinners.

''This is not just a women's issue,'' Mr. Obama said during an exchange about
equal pay for women in the workplace. ''This is a family issue. This is a
middle-class issue. And that's why we've got to fight for it.''

Mr. Romney sought to defend his policies as better for women, denying Mr.
Obama's accusations about contraception and insisting that his record as
Massachusetts governor is one of inclusion and equality.

David Plouffe, a chief Obama strategist, said Wednesday that Mr. Romney might
have a difficult time reconciling his assertion that every woman should have
access to contraceptive services to his support of proposed legislation, since
voted down, to allow employers to opt out of providing insurance for health care
services like contraception on moral grounds.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
