
                              26 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                         The Christian Science Monitor

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Obama's missed debate opportunities against Romney may cost him;
Though many have declared the night a 'win' for President Obama in his second
presidential debate against Mitt Romney, he let several key opportunities to
call Romney on the carpet go by. Think: capital gains tax rates and 'binders
full of women.' Democrats still have reason to worry.

BYLINE: Jeremy Mayer

SECTION:

LENGTH: 937 words


President Obama had a tough assignment for Tuesday night's presidential debate.
He had to repair the self-inflicted damage he did with his pathetic performance
in the first debate, energize the Democratic base with aggressive attacks on
Mitt Romney and a sharp defense of his record, but not alienate the sliver of
undecided voters in swing states who will decide the presidency. And he had to
do this in a town hall format, where direct attack on your opponent is a little
more challenging.

By contrast, all Mr. Romney had to do was avoid gaffes and keep up his reasoned
critique of the Obama presidency.

While Mr. Obama did far better this time, the second presidential debate showed
that Democrats still have reason to be worried, about this election and about
their candidate. Democrats have to face facts - Obama seems to be
temperamentally unsuited to modern political debate. He doesn't exploit sudden
opportunities and has trouble linking a line of questioning to a known Romney
vulnerability.

Is this because he is the "no drama Obama" to his core, an inherently cautious
man who looks for compromise and common ground by nature? Or is he just someone
who doesn't have much knack for biting repartee? Or is his penchant for measured
civility what keeps his "likability" numbers consistently higher than Romney's
in the polls? We may never know; all we can say is the president let several
opportunities go by, in both debates.

That's not to say that Obama lacks talent as a politician. He's a masterful
speaker, a capable tactician, possesses a remarkable mind and memory, and
clearly is a calm and cool leader. But debates uniquely show his weakness.

When the topic of taxes comes up, and you're standing next to Mitt Romney, you
bring up his tax shelters in the Cayman Islands, his Swiss bank accounts, and
you link that to his refusal to release his tax records.

Obama should have pushed Romney on why he asked Paul Ryan to show more tax
returns than he himself will disclose to the voters. "What are you hiding,
Governor, and will you promise tonight to release at least a few more years, so
America knows if your money has been where your mouth has been tonight?"

This hones in on the essential differences that separate Romney from much of the
"middle income folks" he says he wants to help.

Sure, Obama, did note "the fact that [Romney] only has to pay 14 percent on his
taxes when a lot of you are paying much higher." But when Romney talked about
helping the middle class by keeping capital gain taxes low, why didn't Obama
laugh gently and point out that for most middle class Americans, capital gains
are a trivial part of their taxes.

Those weren't fish in a barrel. Those were whales in a Dixie cup.

Obama had moments of good offense, and some of them scored him points. By far
the best was his impassioned defense of his administration's response to the
deaths in Benghazi, and his effective portrayal of Romney's response as shallow
political hackery. And Obama did, finally, bring up Romney's ugly comments
implying that 47 percent of Americans were lazy moochers. It was an obvious
rebuttal to the low-hanging fruit Romney left him with his "I want 100 percent
of America to have a bright and prosperous future" comment.

Democrats quickly declared after the debate that Obama won. But if he did, it
was by a run or two in a low scoring baseball game, not the blowout that he
needed and that was well within reach if Obama were playing harder ball.

Look at what is happening all over the Internet with people mocking Romney's
bizarre reference to "binders full of women." The line has come symbolize his
out-of-touch statements last night about women in the workforce, far
overshadowing his actual record in Massachusetts. A talented politician could
have made that stuff stick on live television.

Democrats are paying for picking a relatively obscure first term Illinois
senator as their leader in 2008. Not only was his resume among the shortest of
any American president, his opposition on the road to that Senate seat was
remarkably weak. His measured style worked against Hillary Clinton in the
primary debates, and against John McCain in the general election, but Obama had
no record to defend and no real need to attack.

Consequently, Democrats are just finding out that Obama is about as effective a
debater as the average Senate candidate. There's no Reagan-esque humor with a
wicked point, or Clinton's ability to launch a data-driven attack that backs his
opponent into a corner with a smile and folksy Southernism.

On the other side of the stage, Romney had a blandly good night. He didn't look
as good as he did in the first debate, in part because Obama looked so much
better. He was more repetitious, and that was grating. But Obama never really
got under his skin, never managed to get Romney with a crisp put down.

The accepted wisdom about debates before the first Romney-Obama event was that
they seldom affect the outcome. The shift in polls across the country following
Romney's first round victory show that may no longer be true, if it ever was.

Two debates down, one to go, and the president has probably stopped the decline
in his poll numbers. But Romney supporters can rest assured that their guy is
still very much in striking distance. It's never easy to defeat an incumbent
president, even in a time of economic struggle. But Mitt Romney may well do it,
in part because the Democratic standard bearer is only an average debater.

Jeremy D. Mayer is an associate professor in the School of Public Policy at
George Mason University where he also directs the masters program in public
policy.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


              Copyright 2012 Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
