
                              29 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                The Western Mail

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

After listless first bout, Obama comes out fighting in critical second round of
debates;
BOTH SETS OF SUPPORTERS GET SOMETHING TO CHEER ABOUT

BYLINE: MIKE JONES

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 878 words


IT was a striking contrast to the listless performance of two weeks ago that
appeared to damage his re-election prospects.

A fired-up President Barack Obama persistently attacked Republican challenger
Mitt Romney in Tuesday night's critical second presidential debate. Mr Obama
blasted Mr Romney's economic plans as damaging to the middle class and accused
him of flip-flopping on issues like energy and gun control.

He appeared angry - a rarely seen emotion in the famously cool Mr Obama - when
Mr Romney, a former Massachusetts governor, criticised his response to the
deadly attack that killed the US ambassador to Libya and three other Americans
at the US Consulate in Benghazi last month.

He pointedly told Mr Romney that any suggestion that his administration "would
play politics or mislead when we've lost four of our own, governor, is
offensive. That's not what we do".

The stakes of the town hall-style debate at Hofstra University, just outside New
York, could not have been higher.

With just three weeks to go before Election Day, the race is locked in a dead
heat and many Americans are already casting ballots in states that allow early
voting.

The open-stage format, with no physical objects between them, placed incumbent
and challenger face to face and, when they chose, directly in each other's
faces.

Their physical encounters crackled with energy and tension, and the crowd
watched raptly as the two sparred while struggling to appear calm and affable
before a national television audience of tens of millions.

It is not clear whether the debate will help Mr Obama regain the momentum he
lost after his poor performance in the October 3 debate, which helped fuel a
rise in opinion polls by Mr Romney.

But his forcefulness was bound to cheer supporters disheartened by his previous
performance.

Mr Romney also gave his supporters reasons to cheer. He appeared confident and
comfortable, as he had been in the first debate, and aggressively returned Mr
Obama's fire.

Mr Romney said the middle class "has been crushed over the last four years", and
that 23 million Americans are struggling to find work.

Economic growth has been slow throughout Mr Obama's term in office, and
unemployment only recently dipped below 8% for the first time since he moved
into the White House.

Mr Romney noted that if out-of-work Americans who no longer look for jobs were
counted, the unemployment rate would be 10.7%.

Mr Romney described the deadly Libya attack as part of an unravelling of the
administration's foreign policy.

He said it took Mr Obama a long time to admit the episode had been a terrorist
attack, but Mr Obama said he had said so the day after the attack in an
appearance at the White House.

When moderator Candy Crowley of CNN said the president had in fact done so, Mr
Obama, prompted: "Say that a little louder, Candy."

Mr Romney also repeated a pledge to declare China a currency manipulator on his
first day in office.

"We can compete with anyone in the world as long as the playing field is level,"
he said.

"China's been cheating over the years" by holding down the value of its currency
and stealing intellectual property. Mr Obama told Mr Romney that "you're the
last person who's going to get tough on China".

He has charged that Mr Romney made money from companies that outsourced jobs to
China while running the private equity firm Bain Capital.

The two men interrupted one another often, speaking over each other to the point
that neither could be understood.

"You'll get your chance in a moment. I'm still speaking," Mr Romney said as he
tried to cut off Mr Obama at one point.

Mr Obama is fighting to hang on to small leads in many of the nine key swing
states that likely will decide the election.

The so-called battleground states - those that do not reliably vote either
Republican or Democratic - take on outsized importance in the US system, in
which presidents are chosen not by the nationwide popular vote but in
state-by-state contests.

From the opening moments, Mr Obama was aggressive. He criticised Mr Romney's
opposition to the Democrats' bailout of the car industry and rejected Mr
Romney's economic proposals as squeezing the middle class.

"Governor Romney says he's got a five-point plan. Governor Romney doesn't have a
five-point plan. He has a one-point plan. And that plan is to make sure that
folks at the top play by a different set of rules," Mr Obama said.

The debate was before an audience of 80 uncommitted voters selected by the
Gallup Organisation who posed questions to the candidates. Ms Crowley chose
speakers after reviewing their proposed questions to avoid repeats.

Mr Obama needed to strike the right balance in coming on strong against Mr
Romney without turning off the audience and millions of television viewers by
going too negative. Mr Obama has said his first debate performance was "too
polite".

While most of the debate was focused on policy differences, there was one
more-personal moment, when Mr Obama raised the issue of Mr Romney's investments
in China.

"Mr President, have you looked at your pension?" Mr Romney interrupted.

"You know, I don't look at my pension. It's not as big as yours," shot back Mr
Obama to his wealthier rival.

Only one more debate, next Monday, now remains and that one will deal with
foreign policy.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Barack Obama and Mitt Romney embrace their wives at the second
presidential debate in New York
Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and President Barack Obama spar
during the second presidential debate at Hofstra University, New York

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WWM


                    Copyright 2012 Western Mail and Echo Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved
