
                              32 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                            Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

JABS, PUNCHES THROWN IN 2ND PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE

BYLINE: Tracie Mauriello, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

SECTION: NATIONAL; THE ROAD TO THE WHITE HOUSE; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1280 words


HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. -- There were jabs from the right and jabs from the left Tuesday
night at Hofstra University. Both presidential candidates came out swinging in a
wide-ranging debate that covered job creation, energy regulation, drilling and
access to birth control.

Over the course of the 90-minute debate, President Barack Obama and Republican
challenger Mitt Romney talked over each other, mischaracterized policy positions
and accused each other of lying.

Free from the constraints of a podium-style debate, they met in the middle of
the stage at times, but came nowhere near the middle on policy issues.

Standing just a few feet from each other at center stage, they engaged in a
short back-and-forth about energy policy, talking over each other and resisting
CNN moderator Candy Crowley's attempts to restore order.

In an early zinger, Mr. Obama blasted Mr. Romney's five-point plan to create
jobs.

"Gov. Romney doesn't have a five-point plan; he has a one-point plan. And that
plan is to make sure that the folks at the top play by a different set of rules.
That's been his philosophy," Mr. Obama said, his demeanor markedly changed from
the first presidential debate in which he appeared tired and unengaged.

He described his rival's approach this way: "You can ship jobs overseas and get
tax breaks for it. You can invest in a company, bankrupt it, lay off the
workers, strip away their pensions and you still make money."

Mr. Romney called that characterization "way off the mark" and blamed Mr. Obama
for crushing the middle class.

In another heated exchange, the former Massachusetts governor accused the
president of blocking jobs in the energy sector by enacting too stringent
regulations, by opposing construction of the Keystone XL pipeline and by
pursuing criminal action when oil drilling caused birds to die in North Dakota.

"This has not been Mr. Gas, Mr. Oil or Mr. Coal," Mr. Romney said. He said the
administration has reduced the number of permits to drill on federal property.

"Not true Gov. Romney," Mr. Obama quickly responded as the two walked toward
each other on stage.

"It's absolutely true," Mr. Romney responded. "I don't think anybody really
believes that you're a person that's going to be pushing for oil or gas or
coal."

The forceful exchange continued with Mr. Romney insisting that energy production
on federal land has decreased while the president maintained that it has
increased.

Audience members also grilled the candidates on issues near and far from home.

A student wanted assurances that there will be good jobs available when he
graduates. A telecommunications worker wanted to know why the White House didn't
better protect Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three others killed last month
in the Libyan consulate.

Mr. Romney used the opportunities to blast the president's response to issues
both foreign and domestic and accused him of tending to political events when he
should have been focused on the aftermath of the Libya attack.

He also said the president took too long to acknowledge the killing was part of
a terrorist plot, not the result of a spontaneous protest over an anti-Muslim
film.

Mr. Obama responded that he talked about a terror attack in his first response
in the Rose Garden,

Mr. Romney continued to say he had not until moderator Ms. Crowley intervened to
say that the president in fact had done so.

"Say that a little louder, Candy." Mr. Obama prompted.

Mr. Obama said he is concerned for ambassadors' safety and that he increased
security in the region after the attack.

It was their second of three debates this election season.

This time the queries didn't come from a well-rehearsed journalist but from
undecided Nassau County, N.Y., voters, some of whom spoke nervously or had to
refer to notes to finish asking their questions.

It's a format the president likes, said Robert Gibbs, a senior campaign adviser
and former White House spokesman.

The stakes were especially high for Mr. Obama in this debate.

He was coming off a lackluster performance in Denver two weeks ago.

Melissa Rospek of Munhall was among 300 Hofstra students selected in a lottery
to watch the debate from risers above the stage.

"It's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to actually go to the debate and be
involved as a student and I really wanted to see it," said Miss Rospek, 19, a
sophomore majoring in English.

In an interview before the debate, she said she supports Mr. Obama but that she
could change her mind based on the debate.

"I don't want to say I'm absolutely solidly Obama until I hear what both of them
have to say about health care and women's rights as far as access to birth
control and abortion," she said.

When the topic came up during the debate, Mr. Obama pointed out that his
opponent wants employers to decide whether employees get insurance coverage of
contraception.

Not true, Mr. Romney said once again.

"I don't believe that bureaucrats in Washington should tell someone whether they
can use contraceptives or not, and I don't believe employers should tell someone
whether they could have contraceptive care or not," he said. "Every woman in
America should have access to contraceptives."

Mr. Obama said he has grown jobs, improved the economy, provided more access to
health care, ended the Iraq war and cut middle-class taxes.

Mr. Romney responded by saying the country is worse off than before the
president took office.

"I think you know that these last four years haven't been so good as the
president just described and that you don't feel like you're confident that the
next four years are going to be much better either," he told the audience. "We
just can't afford four more years like the last four years."

Surrogates from both campaigns flooded the media filing center before, during
and after the debate.

Among them were Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley for Mr. Obama and former
Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge for Mr. Romney.

Mr. Ridge, who supported former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman during the Republican
primary, said Mr. Romney has the right blend of business and civic experience to
lead the country and that he has shown he is a decisive problem solver.

He said he is the kind of candidate Americans -- and especially Pennsylvanians
-- want to help rebuild the economy, resolve the deficit and create jobs.

Mr. O'Malley disagrees.

"What Gov. Romney is offering is more of a fantasy football kind of approach:
stand back and let things happen, to stand back and let mortgage foreclosures
reach rock bottom [and] to stand back and let the middle class shrink," Mr.
O'Malley said.

Political scientists who criticized Mr. Obama's performance in Denver said he
redeemed himself Monday night and particularly endeared himself to women by
reminding them he signed the Lilly Ledbetter Act, which improves pay parity
between the genders.

"The campaign is now reset," said Aaron Kall of the University of Michigan, who
watched the debate on television.

"The bases of both parties probably found positive things to take away," he
said. "It's unclear whether it [will move] the needle in national and swing
state polls that had been turning against President Obama."

This is the second presidential debate the university has hosted.

The 2008 Hofstra debate was seen as the most substantive of the election cycle.
It dissected Mr. Obama's proposal to reform health care and Republican John
McCain's plan to have the government buy up troubled mortgages to stabilize
falling home values.

Hofstra has 11,500 undergraduate and graduate students on its Long Island
campus, a stone's throw from the Aqueduct racetrack and Nassau Veterans Memorial
Coliseum, home of the New York Islanders.

The candidates' third and final matchup will be in Boca Raton, Fla., Monday.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: Washington Bureau Chief Tracie Mauriello: tmauriello@post-gazette.com or
703-996-9292. /

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: David Goldman/Associated Press: President Barack Obama, right,
and Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney square off Tuesday at the second
presidential debate at Hofstra University.
PHOTO: Win McNamee/Getty Images: Moderator Candy Crowley talks to the audience
during the debate.
PHOTO: Eric Gay/Associated Press: Students stand on Tuesday near a display on
the campus of Hofstra University, site of the second presidential debate.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
