
                              34 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                            October 16, 2012 Tuesday

US election: Obama trains for debate he must win: Second weak effort could wreck
re-election hopes Polls put Romney ahead in two crucial swing states

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskill in Washington

SECTION: GUARDIAN INTERNATIONAL PAGES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 870 words


Barack Obama's campaign team yesterday promised that a better-prepared and more
combative president would turn up for tonight's vital debate with Mitt Romney,
as polls showed the two tied in the race for the White House.

"He's energised and I expect he will make a passionate case," Jen Psaki, a
spokeswoman for the Obama campaign, told reporters at his debate preparation
camp in Williamsburg, Virginia. Psaki acknowledged that the polls had tightened
and the race was now "very, very close".

With three weeks left to election day, the onus is on Obama to mount a strong
comeback in tonight's Long Island debate to undo some of the damage caused by
his dismal showing in the first debate a fortnight ago.

But before the first question has been asked, the format of the contest - a
"town hall"-style debate with questions from the audience - has caused
controversy. Representatives from both campaigns expressed concern at the
weekend over the moderator, Candy Crowley, a feisty CNN anchorwoman who said she
views her role as asking follow-up questions as required. Debate negotiators
from the Obama and Romney camps said that was not how they saw her role and the
agreement had been that questions from her would be limited.

Crowley is the first woman since Carole Simpson, in 1992, to moderate a
presidential debate and has been subject to huge media attention since the
announcement was made. Her appointment came after three teenage girls from New
Jersey set up an online petition lobbying for a female moderator that was signed
more than 100,000 times.

Psaki, briefing reporters yesterday, sought to end the row by saying Obama would
happily take questions from either the audience or the moderator.

The sense of urgency in the Democratic camp was captured in an appeal to
supporters for more donations. "What we do over the next 22 days will determine
not just the next four years, but what this country looks like for decades to
come. That's what I'll be fighting for up on that stage tomorrow night," the
message from Obama said.

The appeal also came as it was revealed that the Romney camp had raised $117m
last month, putting the 2012 election on course to be the costliest ever. Obama
will need to lift Democratic morale, building on his running-mate Joe Biden's
aggressive showing in the vice-presidential debate last Thursday.

In the run-up to the first debate Obama seemed disinterested, finding excuses to
avoid preparing, including a visit to the Hoover dam near his debate camp in
Nevada. This time there have been no distractions apart from walks in the
grounds of his retreat.

Psaki told reporters the president would be "firm but respectful" in his
approach to Romney, suggesting he would not adopt the same strategy as Biden,
who was accused of being rude, patronising and disrespectful to his opponent,
Paul Ryan.

The president has reviewed the Denver debate, studied Romney's policies
intensively and is practising hard with the Romney stand-in, Senator John Kerry,
a former Democratic presidential candidate.

Hinting at the strategy he will pursue, Psaki accused Romney of "trying to hide
from his severely conservative record".

Obama was heavily criticised by Democrats after Denver for failing to exploit
Romney's perceived weaknesses, such as the secret video in which he dismissed
47% of Americans as freeloaders, his stance on women's rights, his record at
Bain Capital, and his unwillingness to provide details of his tax and
deficit-reduction plans.

Before the Denver debate the race had seemed all but over. Since then Republican
activists and enthusiasts have been energised and polls have tightened.

A Washington Post/ABC poll published yesterday had Obama on 49% to Romney's 46%
among likely voters, while a Politico poll gave Obama 49% and Romney 48%.

The most significant shift over the last fortnight has been in eight swing
states, where Romney has largely eroded Obama's poll leads. A Public Policy
Polling survey, published yesterday, put Romney up 1% in Florida, the biggest of
the swing states. Romney has risen five points since last month in the state.
PPP also puts Romney up two points in another swing state, North Carolina, on
49% to Obama's 47%.

In Ohio, one of the last lines of defence if Florida, North Carolina and other
east coast swing states fall to Romney, Obama has kept a five-point lead: PPP
had Obama on 51% to Romney's 46%, little changed from the 49% to 45% a fortnight
ago.

The Long Island debate is being compared to 1984 when Ronald Reagan, after a
poor first debate against Walter Mondale, rebounded strongly. Obama has come
back from setbacks before: in 2007, during the battle for the Democratic
nomination, when aides and donors criticised him for his apparent apathy, and
again in 2008 when he was threatened by a row over remarks by his then Chicago
pastor.

Genuine town-hall debates before the public can be exciting, rowdy and
unpredictable, but this will be more organised, with 80 potential questioners
chosen by Gallup. Still, the debaters must not be seen as condescending towards
the voters.

Captions:

While her husband prepared for his debate, Michelle Obama was at a campaign
rally at Ohio Wesleyan University in Delaware, Ohio Photograph: Jewel
Samad/AFP/Getty

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
