
                              44 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                                  Guardian.com

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Obama steps up criticism of Romney in battle for women voters

BYLINE: Ewen MacAskillguardian.co.uk

LENGTH: 796 words

ABSTRACT

President in Iowa pokes fun of Romney's 'binders full of women' remark and
accuses rival of wanting to return to the 1950s

FULL TEXT

Barack Obama stepped up his attacks on Mitt Romney in the battle to appeal to
female voters as he sought to exploit the Republican's clumsy and odd responses
during their second presidential debate.

Women's issues were prominent in Tuesday night's debate as Obama and Romney
clashed over gender equality and contraception.

Obama is widely judged to have won the debate, undoing at least some of the
damage caused by his painfully poor showing in the first one a fortnight ago.

On the campaign trail in Iowa on Wednesday, Obama latched on to some of the
remarks made by Romney, in particular a bizarre one about being offered "whole
binders full of women" when searching for female recruits to his cabinet when he
was governor of Massachusetts.

The comment went viral on the internet, with some complaining that Romney was
being patronising towards women, and others expressing puzzlement over what he
was talking about.

Obama poked fun of him at a rally in Iowa. "I tell you what: we don't have to
collect a bunch of binders to find qualified talented women," Obama said.

The president, wearing a pink wristband to promote breast cancer awareness,
hammered home the point just in case anyone thought he was just making a stray
remark.

"You can choose to turn back the clock 50 years for women, gays and immigrants -
or you can move us forward," Obama said.

The Obama campaign has repeatedly challenged Romney on his views on
contraception and abortion, and accused him of wanting a return to the 1950s.

In Iowa, Obama, who favours ready access to contraception and supports abortion,
said: "I certainly don't think politicians should control the healthcare that
you get."

He made the point that equal pay was not just a matter of principle, but a
personal affair, too. As father of two daughters, he wanted them to be paid the
same as other parents' sons.

Female voters have jumped to top priority for both Obama and Romney. Until
recently, Obama had enjoyed a double-digit lead among women over Romney, more
than enough to compensate for Romney's lead among white males. But Romney's team
claims Obama's lead among women has gone, though the Obama team disputes this.

A Gallup seven-day poll tracking poll puts Romney ahead of Obama, 51% to 45%,
among likely voters, though this was taken before Tuesday night's debate.

Romney has also reduced Obama's lead in Wisconsin, a state that initially was
not included as a swing state on the assumption it was going to Obama. A new
Marquette University poll puts Obama on 49% to Romney's 48%.

Over the past few weeks, Romney has been repositioning himself in the centre and
has softened his position on women's issues. His campaign put out an ad on
Monday insisting that women's right to contraception and abortion would not be
harmed if he was president.

His running mate, Paul Ryan, Wednesday attempted to explain away the "binders"
remark. "All he simply meant was that he went out of his way to try to recruit
qualified women to serve in his administration when he was governor," Ryan, who
also said that Romney had an exceptional record in recruiting women, told CBS.
"That's really what he was saying."

Romney has shifted ground during his political career, from relatively moderate
while governor of Democratic-leaning Massachusetts to strongly conservative on
social issues during the Republican primaries and caucuses when he said he would
appoint to the supreme court judges who would overturn abortion rights.

During the debate, Romney accused Obama of misrepresenting his position on
contraception, insisting he was in favour of it being widely available.

In the debate, Obama came across as the more sympathetic to women's rights. In
exchanges on equal pay, the president said: "This is not just a women's issue.
This is a family issue. This is a middle-class issue. And that's why we've got
to fight for it."

The comment about "binders full of women" came during exchanges on equal rights.
Romney said that as governor of Massachusetts he was concerned about the
shortage of women in his cabinet.

"I said: 'Well, gosh, can't we find some women that are also qualified?' And so
we took a concerted effort to go out and find women who had backgrounds that
could be qualified to become members of our cabinet," Romney said. The remarks
went a long way to calming the sense of panic that had begun to enter Democratic
ranks.

Obama, transformed from the listless, unfocused candidate who lost badly to
Romney in the first presidential debate in Denver a fortnight ago, landed
damaging blows on his Republican rival in telling exchanges over women's rights,
the Benghazi consulate attack and tax proposals.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 Guardian Unlimited
                              All Rights Reserved
