
                              49 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                   USA TODAY

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

With gloves off, do they connect?;
TV moments, whether ad spots or debates, often make up minds

BYLINE: Susan Page, @susanpage, USA TODAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 1065 words


Call it fight night.

That low-key, low-energy Barack Obama whose performance was widely panned after
the first presidential debate two weeks ago apparently stayed back in Denver.
With his ambitions for a second term on the line, the president talked faster,
pushed back harder and challenged Mitt Romney with more specifics in a crackling
second encounter on Long Island on Tuesday.

The Republican nominee often was put on the defensive, forced to explain
promises he made during the Republican primaries on immigration and taxes. He
seemed taken aback when Obama blasted him for what the president characterized
as an effort to score political points from violence  that cost a U.S.
ambassador's life. And in one of several confrontations that put the two men
virtually toe-to-toe, Romney demanded to know whether Obama realized he had
investments in China in his pension.

"Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?" Romney asked. "Have you looked
at your pension? Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?"

"It's not as big as yours, so it doesn't take as long," Obama said to laughter.

A few moments on TV more than likely will determine who is elected president in
21 days. The question is which moments: the  memorable exchanges from the three
90-minute debates between Obama and Romney? Or the impact from a flood of
30-second ads both sides are airing?

Strategists  viewed the second debate as a pivotal event in a contest that is
once again strikingly close. After a year-long campaign, the town-hall-style
forum at Hofstra University was probably the best remaining opportunity for
Romney to build on the positive impression he made in the first debate and for
Obama to regain the momentum he lost there.

Obama came across as more engaged and presidential than he did in Denver, and he
hit themes he failed to spotlight in the first debate. In response to the first
question, he managed to mention Romney's opposition to the auto bailout. In the
last, he noted Romney's controversial "47%" comment. In remarks that seemed
tailor-made to please female voters, he noted his debt to his single mother and
his grandmother and his aspirations for his two daughters.

Romney, meanwhile, struck a regretful tone when he expressed disappointment in
the president's  tenure, a sentiment mentioned  by a voter who posed a question
in the debate. "If you elect President Obama, you know what you're going to
get," the former Massachusetts governor said. "You'll get a repeat of the last
four years." He called Obama "great as a speaker" but, in effect, a failure as a
president in delivering prosperity for the middle class.

Given the build-up beforehand for the high-stakes encounter, the debate
presumably drew a huge audience. The first was watched by 67 million people,
Nielsen reported, the most for any presidential debate since 1992.

Still, in the battleground states, the debates are framed by an unprecedented
onslaught of political advertising, almost all of it negative. On local stations
from Orlando to Columbus, Richmond to Las Vegas, airtime from now until election
eve is sold out and campaign ads are running back-to-back.

It is easier to skip the debates than avoid the spots. In a USA TODAY/Gallup
Poll of swing states, nearly eight of 10 residents in a dozen top battlegrounds
say they have seen an ad for Obama or Romney in the past three days. (So did 63%
of those in non-swing states.)

For most, it wasn't a positive experience. A 55% majority in the battlegrounds
say this year's  ads have "turned them off to the campaign." Just a third say
they have made them "feel more excited" about it.

That said, voters in the battlegrounds acknowledge that the ads are influential.
Six in 10 say the campaign ads they've seen have made them more certain about
whom they'll support. Fewer than one in five say the ads made them less certain.

Obama ads in particular seem to have made an impression: 67% of Democrats say
the ads solidified their vote, a bit more than the 60% of Republicans who say
the same.

The poll of 1,023 registered voters was taken Oct. 5-11 in Colorado, Florida,
Iowa, Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Virginia and Wisconsin. The margin of error is +/-4 percentage
points.

In this campaign more than previous ones, the ads and the debates seem to be
filling divergent roles. Almost all of the TV ads have been negative -- that is,
devoted to blasting the other candidate.

A study by the Wesleyan Media Project released  this month reported that fewer
than 8% of the presidential ads in the previous three weeks had been positive,
mentioning only the candidate it backed. That's much lower than in 2000, when
30% of the ads were positive, or in 2008, when 19% were.

In some ways, the debates are designed to be an antidote to ads. On a small
stage, surrounded on three sides by an audience of about 80 undecided or
"persuadable" voters, they tried to make the case for themselves. Obama touted
his record as president; Romney bragged about his record as Massachusetts
governor and head of the Salt Lake City Olympics.

But they also turned nearly every question to an attack on the other. In an
emotional exchange, Romney accused Obama of behaving inappropriately by leaving
Washington to headline political fundraisers on the day after a U.S. ambassador
was assassinated in Libya, and of trying to mislead Americans about the
terrorist nature of that attack.

Obama turned the charge back to Romney: "The suggestion that anybody on my team
team, the secretary of State, our U.N. ambassador, anybody on my team, would
play politics or mislead when we've lost four of our own is offensive,
Governor."

Their exchanges weren't exactly spontaneous -- each candidate spent days at "
debate camps" beforehand rehearsing quips and practicing answers -- but they are
less scripted than almost anything else the candidates do during a campaign.

In the end, says Mitchell McKinney of the University of Missouri, "the power of
the 30-second spot may well trump the effect of debates."

Debates can help maintain or change momentum, as the first debate boosted Romney
, and as the second debate may revive Obama's prospects. But after next week's
final debate in Florida, focused on foreign policy, the candidates and their
allies will intensify their campaigns on the airwaves.  When the debates are
over, the ads will still be on the air.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: NEWSPAPER


                      Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
