
                              11 of 1244 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             October 5, 2012 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Romney rocks the vote;
A NATION DECIDES us election 2012 ; Romney campaign bounces back to life ;
Republican candidate shook up the race with a strong debate performance,
Catherine Philp reports ; Romney campaign bounces back to life

BYLINE: Catherine Philp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25,26,27

LENGTH: 963 words


Now it's the Democrats' turn to panic. A newly energised Republican Party
rallied round its presidential candidate, Mitt Romney, yesterday after his
triumph over President Obama in the inaugural debate brought his losing streak
to a dramatic halt.

Mr Romney flew straight from the debate in Denver to a celebration rally in the
crucial swing state of Virginia yesterday amid a blitz of headlines about his
lightning switch from insipid campaigner to stellar debater.

Just as stunning, and just as worrying for Mr Obama's supporters, was the
President's own transformation. The pale, listless version of Mr Obama who took
the stage in Denver seemed so unrecognisable as the one-time purveyor of hope
and change that even sympathisers were left wondering whether he wanted the job
at all.

"It looked like Romney wanted to be there, and President Obama didn't want to be
there," the Democratic strategist James Carville lamented. Republicans were
jubilant. Asked if Republicans would wake up feeling much better about the
Romney campaign in the morning, Marco Rubio, the Florida senator, shot back:
"We're feeling better tonight."

Mr Romney went into the debate knowing that it was almost certainly his last
chance to put his campaign back on track. Mr Obama, who leads the race
nationally and has surged out of sight in some swing states, faced the more
modest task of preserving the status quo.

Stylistically, Mr Romney's biggest challenge was to humanise himself to voters
and challenge the widely held view of him as a heartless plutocrat. He did so by
invoking the pleas of help he had heard from people he has met on the campaign
trail.

And while he tempered barbs with humour, he hurled them nonetheless. "Mr
President, you are entitled to your own airplane, your own house as president,
but not to your own facts," he quipped.

But the content of what Mr Romney had to say also put the President on the back
foot.

Mr Romney has spent much of his campaign in thrall to his party's Right. During
the debate, he broke free of their grip, presenting himself as a moderate
centrist who would work across the aisle. And in a single punchy line, using
language pilfered from Mr Continued on page 26

Continued from page 25 Obama's own phrase book, he framed the case for firing
the President.

"What we're seeing right now is in my view a trickle-down government approach
which has government thinking it can do a better job than free people pursuing
their dreams, and it's not working," Mr Romney said.

For the first half hour, it appeared as if Mr Obama's strategy was to bore
viewers away before Mr Romney landed any punches. Those who stayed tuned,
however, saw the President as they have never seen him before: rambling,
irritable and lacking in soul. Mr Obama didn't just refrain from attacking Mr
Romney, he turned the attacks on himself.

"Four years ago I said that I'm not a perfect man and I wouldn't be a perfect
president, and that's probably a promise thatyesterday Governor Romney thinks
I've kept," he said.

Often, he seemed unaware that the debate was being shown in split screen,
showing one talking and their opponent's reaction. As Mr Romney was speaking, he
nodded, giving the appearance of agreement. And while Mr Romney listened as Mr
Obama spoke, Mr Obama spent Mr Romney's answers looking down and writing notes.

Democrats were infuriated that Mr Obama allowed the 90 minutes to slide by
without challenging what they said were Mr Romney's repeated falsehoods. "Where
was Obama tonight?" Chris Matthews, the host of the debate show on the
Leftleaning MSNBC channel fumed. "I don't know how he let Romney get away with
the crap he threw at him."

Yesterday morning, the Obama campaign rushed out a video called Romney's Debate
Lies, identifying 12 deliberately false statements it claimed Mr Romney had
made.

At a rally in Denver the morning after the debate, Mr Obama joked about sharing
the stage with "this guy playing Mitt Romney", adding that the policies he had
talked about were unrecognisable from the ones heard on the campaign trail over
the past year. "If you want to be president, you owe the American people the
truth," he said.

Whether Mr Romney's debate victory will change the dynamics of the race remains
unclear. David Axelrod, Mr Obama's special adviser, said yesterday that he
expected Mr Romney's ratings to rise, at least temporarily, by one to three
points. That would be a big enough bounce to draw level with Mr Obama
nationally, but not nearly enough to catch up in the handful of states where the
election will be decided and where Mr Obama is currently a long way ahead.

Perhaps the most important shortterm boost is the psychological one it has
provided to Republicans, jolting them out of the gloom and confusion and chasing
away the odour of death hanging over the Romney campaign.

It fell to Senator John McCain, who debated with Mr Obama in the 2008 election,
to warn fellow Republicans against any early triumphalism, noting that two more
debates remain before election day. Mr Obama, he warned, would not make the same
mistakes twice, and Mr Romney could not afford to let down his guard.

"Do not underestimate President Obama," he said. "I would not underestimate the
President of the United States in the next couple debates and I don't think Mitt
will, either."

Ben Macintyre, page 21 The web response @daveweigel This is like watching a tax
law professor debate an investment advice infomercial host @DennisDMZ Obama
better hope a Kicked Ass is covered under Obamacare.

@sullydish This is a rolling calamity for Obama.

He''s boring, abstract, and less human-seeming than Romney!

Continued from page 25 Obama's [...]

us elections: debate Who won? 46% Romney 22% 32% Obama Tie A 500-person instant
poll taken by CBS News immediately after the debate

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mitt Romney gets a hug from his granddaughter Chloe and a smile from
his wife, Ann, after re-energising his campaign with a winning performance in
Denver
CHARLIE NEIBERGALL / AP
President Obama gave lacklustre performance
JOSH CIESLA, @FIREDBIGBIRD / TWITTER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2012 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
