
                              52 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                 The Australian

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday
                         1 - All-round Country Edition

Obama gets tough with Romney DEMOCRATS HOPE A MORE AGGRESSIVE APPROACH WILL STOP
A DROP IN OPINION POLLS

BYLINE: BRAD NORINGTON

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1281  words


THE campaign team behind Barack Obama's re-election bid is banking on
yesterday's pugnacious performance by the US President in his second debate
showdown to stop a surge in voter support for Republican challenger Mitt Romney.

Just three weeks before the presidential election, Mr Obama made up for his
subdued and hesitant first encounter a fortnight ago by confronting Mr Romney at
every opportunity.

In a lively joust, the Democrat President dismissed Mr Romney's five-point plan
to revive the US economy and blasted his proposal that the US car industry
should have been allowed to go bankrupt.

He accused Mr Romney of a ``sketchy deal'' on proposed tax cuts that offered no
specifics about elimination of deductions and loopholes used to pay for them.

Mr Obama said Mr Romney was offering his party's same failed remedy of the past
by offering tax cuts for the wealthy that did not give the middle class a fair
shot.

``Governor Romney doesn't have a five-point plan. He has a one-point plan,'' Mr
Obama said. ``And that plan is to make sure that folks at the top play by a
different set of rules. That's been his philosophy in the private sector, that's
been his philosophy as a governor and that's been his philosophy as a
presidential candidate.''

During a series of testy exchanges, the Republican insisted his tax figures did
add up and said he knew how to run a budget as a successful businessman, past
governor of Massachusetts and chief organiser of the 2002 Winter Olympics.

``The President has tried but his policies haven't worked,'' Mr Romney said.
``He's great as a speaker, and describing his plans and his vision, that's
wonderful, except that we have a record to look at.

``And that record shows that he just hasn't been able to cut the deficit, to put
in place reforms for Medicare and social security, to get us the rising incomes
we need.''

The second debate was a make-or-break moment for Mr Obama after his lacklustre
turn on October 3 in Denver, Colorado, sparked a slump in national opinion polls
and, most crucially, a decline in battleground states such as Ohio, Florida and
Virginia where the election will most likely be decided.

A snap CNN/ORC poll of undecided voters taken immediately after yesterday's
debate handed victory to Mr Obama by 46 to 39 per cent.

Senior Obama adviser David Plouffe said the President gave a ``very dominant
performance'' and had laid out clearly where he wanted to take the country with
a jobs plan intended to help the middle class. By contrast, he said, Mr Romney
had wilted under scrutiny of his tax plan.

Republicans, expecting Mr Obama to be more aggressive, were also buoyed by their
candidate's confident performance yesterday.

Rob Portman, the Ohio senator who helped Mr Romney by playing Mr Obama in
practice debates, said: ``He was terrific tonight, he laid out the case.'' Asked
about Mr Obama's more fiery approach, Mr Portman said: ``You can change your
style, but that doesn't change your record.''

After shying away from direct attacks in their first encounter, Mr Obama singled
out near the debate's close the damaging reported comment made by Mr Romney at a
private campaign event dismissing 47 per cent of Americans as victims who paid
no tax.

The President said his opponent had insulted retirees on social security who had
worked all their lives, war veterans who had made sacrifices fighting for their
country, students trying to advance their dreams and people working hard every
day who did not earn enough to pay income tax.

Mr Romney said he could get the US economy on track again. ``We don't have to
settle for what we're going through. We don't have to settle for gasoline at
four bucks. We don't have to settle for unemployment at a chronically high
level. We don't have to settle for 47 million people on food stamps. We don't
have to settle for 50 per cent of kids coming out of college not able to get
work.''

The candidates clashed over gun rights, with Mr Obama saying he favoured
renewing an expired ban on assault weapons after a series of shooting massacres,
while Mr Romney said he favoured no new laws and preferred more emphasis on
strong families.

On women's rights, Mr Obama said he favoured health insurers covering
contraception, while Mr Romney disputed claims that he did not.

Mr Romney agreed with Mr Obama that the children of illegal immigrants should
have a pathway to citizenship, but stuck by his position that undocumented
migrants should ``self-deport''.

One of the most contentious moments came when Mr Romney said he was disturbed
that a day after the US ambassador to Libya and three staff were killed last
month, Mr Obama had flown to Las Vegas for a political fundraiser, and had
referred to what happened as a demonstration when it was in fact a terrorist
attack.

Clearly angered, Mr Obama said he spoke publicly at the White House a day after
the attack to say he would find out what happened, and had called it an ``act of
terror'' and pledged to hunt down the perpetrators. A few days later he had been
present when the caskets of those killed arrived back in the US, and he grieved
with the families of those killed.

``The suggestion that anybody in my team, the Secretary of State or UN
ambassador, anybody on my team, would play politics or mislead, when we've lost
four of our own, Governor, is offensive.''

The 90-minute debate at Hofstra University in New York state used a ``town
hall'' format in which undecided voters asked questions of the candidates with
CNN journalist Candy Crowley as moderator.

Next week's final debate before the November 6 election will focus on foreign
policy. Mr Obama was urged by advisers to be more aggressive after his
lacklustre debate a fortnight ago triggered a slump in his opinion poll ratings
in the last stretch of the presidential race. The latest Gallup poll shows Mr
Romney ahead of Mr Obama 50 to 46 per cent among likely voters. Leads that the
President had enjoyed in battleground states in the wake of his party's national
convention last month have evaporated to a mere few points or break-even.

----- WHAT THEY SAID -----

MITT ROMNEY

'I care about 100 per cent of the American people'

BARACK OBAMA

When he said behind closed doors that 47 per cent of the country considers
themselves victims who refuse personal responsibility - think about who he was
talking about: folks on social security who've worked all their lives, veterans
who've sacrificed for this country . . . people who are working hard every day,
paying payroll tax, gas taxes, but don't make enough income. I want to fight for
them'

ROMNEY ON JOBS

'The middle class has been crushed over the last four years, and jobs have been
too scarce. I know what it takes to bring them back, and I'm going to do that'

OBAMA ON THE DEATH OF THE US AMBASSADOR AND THREE OF HIS DIPLOMATIC STAFF IN
BENGHAZI, LIBYA

'The suggestion that anybody on my team would play politics or mislead when
we've lost four of our own, Governor, is offensive'

ROMNEY ON TAX

'I will not under any circumstances, reduce the share that's being paid by the
highest income taxpayers. And I will not, under any circumstances, increase
taxes on the middle class'

OBAMA ON ENERGY INDEPENDENCE

'We're drilling more (oil) on public lands than the previous administration, and
the previous president was an oil man'

ROMNEY ON FORMER REPUBLICAN PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH

'President Bush and I are different people and these are different times. I'll
crack down on China on trade. President Bush didn't. I'm going to get us a
balanced budget. President Bush didn't . . . I'm championing small business. Our
party has been championing big business too long'

OBAMA

'Governor, you're the last person who's going to get tough on China'

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: AUS


                   Copyright 2012 Nationwide News Pty Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
