
                              53 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Obama bounces back;
The incumbent rebounds from a weak performance in the first debate, clashing
with challenger Mitt Romney over energy, taxes and terrorism - with a strong
pitch for women voters

BYLINE: KONRAD YAKABUSKI

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; U. S. POLITICS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A re-energized President Barack Obama made an open plea for women's votes in his
second debate against Republican nominee Mitt Romney, underscoring his urgent
need to rebuild a big lead among female electors to hold on to the White House.

The two candidates also clashed bitterly over energy policy, trade, taxes and
last month's attack on a U.S. consulate during Tuesday's town-hall session, a
high-decibel encounter that reflected an increasingly tight race leading up to
the Nov. 6 vote.

The debate was a critical test for Mr. Obama, whose lead in the polls evaporated
after his limp performance in the first presidential debate on Oct. 3.

Mr. Romney's support among women spiked after that debate, shrinking the gender
gap that had favoured the President.

Mr. Obama was not about to repeat his mistake and used the town-hall forum to
paint Mr. Romney as a "more extreme" candidate than George W. Bush on social
issues, one who would restrict women's access to contraception. He also accused
his opponent, who has touted his five-point plan to get the economy moving, as
having only a "one-point plan" aimed at favouring the wealthy.

"The choice in this election is going to be whose promises are going to be more
likely to help you in your life, make sure your kids can go to college, make
sure that you are getting a good-paying job, making sure that Medicare and
Social Security will be there for you," Mr. Obama said.

Noting that his health-care law requires employers to cover birth control in
employee health-insurance plans, Mr. Obama said Mr. Romney opposed the policy.
"That's not the kind of advocacy that women need."

Mr. Romney denied that: "Every woman in America should have access to
contraceptives. And the President's statement of my policy is completely and
totally wrong."

As governor of Massachusetts, Mr. Romney added, he reviewed "binders full of
women" for his cabinet and provided flexible working hours for his
chief-of-staff to accommodate her family.

The "binders full of women" remark quickly went viral on social media.

The town-hall forum at Hofstra University on Long Island, N.Y., in which
ordinary voters got to ask questions of the candidates, gave Mr. Obama and Mr.
Romney an opportunity to demonstrate their abilities to connect with average
citizens. But the palpable tension between the candidates meant they were
focused less on the questioners than on outmanoeuvring each other.

Republicans had been counting on Mr. Romney to skewer Mr. Obama over his
handling of the Sept. 11 attack on the Benghazi consulate. But the GOP nominee
bungled his opportunity to score on that issue by erroneously accusing Mr. Obama
of failing to immediately identify the assault as a terrorist act. The President
did so, albeit obliquely, the day after the attack, and Mr. Romney was corrected
by moderator Candy Crowley.

Instead, Mr. Obama appeared to get the best of his rival by suggesting Mr.
Romney attempted to make political hay out of a national-security crisis as it
was unfolding.

"That's not how a commander-in-chief operates," Mr. Obama asserted angrily. "You
don't turn national security into a political issue, certainly not right when
it's happening."

The standoff between the candidates centred on the question of whether the Obama
administration intentionally sought to play down the seriousness of the Benghazi
attack, chalking it up to a "spontaneous" protest against an anti-Muslim video.

Mr. Obama strongly denied that, saying "the suggestion that anybody on my team
... would play politics or mislead when we've lost four of our own, Governor, is
offensive. That's not what we do."

In other exchanges, Mr. Romney also denied that wealthy Americans would pay less
in taxes under him.

"The top 5 per cent of taxpayers will continue to pay 60 per cent of the income
tax the nation collects. So that'll stay the same. Middle-income people are
going to get a tax break," Mr. Romney insisted. "I will not under any
circumstances reduce the share that's being paid by the highest-income
taxpayers, and I will not under any circumstances increase taxes on the middle
class."

Mr. Romney suggested Canada's federal corporate income-tax rate of 15 per cent
could lure entrepreneurs north of the border to escape the U.S. federal
corporate rate of 35 per cent.

"So if you're starting a business, where would you rather start it?" Mr. Romney
asked. "We have to be competitive if we're going to create more jobs here."

Both candidates have proposed cutting the U.S. corporate rate, Mr. Obama to 28
per cent, Mr. Romney to 25 per cent.

Mr. Romney also accused the President of making it harder for energy companies
to drill for oil and gas on federal lands, while Mr. Obama argued otherwise.

"This has not been Mr. Oil or Mr. Gas or Mr. Coal," Mr. Romney said. "Talk to
the people that are working in those industries. I was in coal country. People
grabbed my arms and said, 'Please, save my job.' "

But Mr. Obama reminded voters that Mr. Romney cracked down on a coal-fired
electricity plant when he was governor of Massachusetts, saying he "took great
pride in shutting it down. And now suddenly you're a big champion of coal."

A USA Today/Gallup poll released on the eve of Tuesday's debate showed Mr.
Romney leading Mr. Obama among likely voters in 12 key swing states by 50 per
cent to 46 per cent. Mr. Obama's lead among female voters shrank from the double
digits before the last debate to a single percentage point in the latest Gallup
survey. The Obama campaign put out a release calling the Gallup survey "an
extreme outlier."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


 Copyright 2012 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
