
                              55 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Comment: Elections are settled on the ground, not on the telly: As Obama and
Romney's latest bout shows, a TV debate can distract from the real arguments.
Let's not copy its flaws in 2015

BYLINE: Martin Kettle

SECTION: GUARDIAN COMMENT AND DEBATE PAGES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 1062 words


Did you listen in to the overnight news from America a little apprehensively
yesterday morning? Log on to your favourite news website not quite knowing what
you would read about the second presidential debate? I don't think I can have
been the only one.

Barack Obama's seriously lacklustre performance in the first debate two weeks
ago was a shock at the top end of the political Richter scale. It was felt
across the world, not just in America. But a careful daytime watching yesterday
of Tuesday's debate absolutely confirms the initial verdict carried by
yesterday's early bulletins. Obama is back in the contest. This was partly a
matter of performance; Obama turned up this time. He was combative and engaged.
A fortnight ago he had given the impression his mind was elsewhere.

But the key thing was his focused message on the central economic questions.
Obama's number one task was to destroy Romney's new claims to be a moderate. He
had to remind viewers of the things Romney has said all through the race for the
nomination. He had to shine the light on the deeply conservative Republican
party platform on which Romney stands. On that, Obama could hardly be faulted.
You can feel the sighs of Democratic relief from all the way across the
Atlantic.

So is it game on again? Round one to Romney. Round two to Obama. And does
everything now rest on round three next Monday in Boca Raton, the emblematic
affluent Florida Geriatrica resort in which Romney made his infamous attack on
47% of Americans in May? That's the way the media would like to frame it. Having
been desperate for Romney to turn the campaign into a contest not a procession,
the media has a collective interest in keeping the contest alive.

But let's just pause a moment. Let's ask ourselves whether the right way to read
the contest for the White House is through these debates? After all, that has
rarely been true in the past. It certainly was not the case in 2008. Indeed
before this year's election finally reached what Americans call the home
stretch, the conventional wisdom was that the 2012 televised debates would not
be decisive.

This seemed at the time to be an overdue and welcome recognition of reality.
Down the years the debates have always been built up as pivotal moments. But
they haven't often delivered on the promise. The contest between Obama and John
McCain four years ago was a case in point. Instead, as Alistair Cooke observed
in this newspaper after the first Kennedy-Nixon debate in 1960, the TV
confrontations have mostly confirmed viewers in the views which they had already
formed.

But then came the 3 October debate between Obama and Romney in Denver. Not for
the first time, the Washington conventional wisdom was turned on its head.
Romney turned in a winning performance, tacking dramatically to the centre,
while Obama never really looked engaged. Ever since, the old wish for the
debates to dominate the election campaign has sprung back to life. But what if
the debates aren't really as important as the media - and indeed the candidates
- actually think? What if the contest is being settled by other, deeper things?

It is worth remembering our own experience in 2010 here. Britain had never had
party leader debates until two years ago. Given the novelty, it isn't surprising
that they had the British political class spellbound. Nick Clegg's accomplished
performance in the first debate was the talk of the country. Lib Dem poll
ratings briefly went off the grid.

And then? In the end, the debates seem to have had less impact than everyone,
including the leaders, thought at the time. Cleggmania quickly ebbed and the Lib
Dems ended up losing seats overall. Labour rallied a little in spite of Gordon
Brown's poor showing. David Cameron did enough to come out on top but not enough
to overcome wider doubts about the Tory party.

In short, the debates provided a huge story. But they had little lasting impact
on the election result. They were not the turning point. That ought to be a
sobering thought for British political leaders as the 2015 election looms into
view. Debates absorb a disproportionate amount of campaign resources, including
the party leader's time, for a large part of our month-long campaigns. Prepping,
taking part, then dealing with the outcome leaves little room for pursuing a
policy agenda. Leaders won't have time for much else.

Good thing or bad? Wrong question. Now the genie is out of the bottle, televised
debates in British elections are with us to stay. Yet some of the most
interesting behind-the scenes-conversations at the recent UK party conferences
were about the form of the 2015 debates. I'd say there is a latent consensus in
all three parties in favour of just one leaders' debate next time, instead of
2010's three. Good if so. Journalists ought to support such a plan. It would
stop the domination of the campaign by the debates. The problem is rivalry
between the broadcasters. If there is just one debate, who gets to ask the
questions?

Britain is not America, nor America Britain. There is nevertheless a common
pattern. Televised debates are necessary but not sufficient elements in an
election. They can take over, or appear to take over, from wider argument about
what the country needs and from the campaign on the ground. But this is where
elections are more often settled, like it or not.

In America's 2008 election, the political class thought that John McCain either
won or drew all three debates against Obama. Post-debate polls painted a very
different picture in Obama's favour. But Obama didn't win in 2008 because he
out-debated McCain. He won because the mood in the early economic downturn was
for change and because he had superior organisation on the ground.

This time is different. The economy still struggles. The mood is edgier. Obama
is less romantic than four years ago. He has not been able to wave a magic wand.
The Republicans are fired up for fanatical solutions. American demographics are
going against them.

These things were true before the debates and they will be true after they are
over. Televised election debates are more a confirmatory exercise than a contest
in brilliance. Their impact is limited. The public mood and the great questions
of the day matter more. This is as it should be. This was always going to be a
very tight election indeed. And it still is.

martin.kettle@guardian.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 2012 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
