
                              58 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                           Pittsburgh Tribune Review

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Head-to-head combat

BYLINE: by MIKE WERESCHAGIN and SALENA ZITO

LENGTH: 901 words


In a lively face-off Tuesday night, the two major party candidates for president
sparred over taxes, energy production and the death of a U.S. ambassador.

President Obama and Republican nominee Mitt Romney, allowed to roam the stage
with wireless microphones at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y., frequently
challenged each other during the second of three presidential debates. CNN chief
political correspondent Candy Crowley moderated the town hall-style debate, in
which the questions came from some of the 82 uncommitted voters in the room
rather than the moderator.

One of the sharpest exchanges came over the death of Chris Stevens, the U.S.
ambassador to Libya who was killed when militants overran the consulate in
Benghazi on Sept. 11.

Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, criticized Obama for leaving
Washington the following day to attend a fundraiser in Las Vegas and campaign
the day after that in Colorado. Obama shot back that Romney issued a press
release trying to take political advantage of the attack that night.

"That's not how a commander in chief operates. You don't turn national security
into a political issue," Obama said.

On Monday, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that she was responsible for
decisions that left the consulate without enough security to repel the attack.
Obama on Tuesday said, "I am ultimately responsible for what's taken place
there."

Romney also took issue with the administration's statements early on that the
attack appeared to be an outgrowth of protests over a video that insulted Islam.

"There was no demonstration involved. It was a terrorist attack This calls into
question the president's whole policy in the Middle East," Romney said. He added
that the administration was either misleading people or didn't know what it was
talking about.

"The suggestion that anybody on my team would play politics or mislead  when
we've lost four of our own, Governor, is offensive. That's not what we do.
That's not what I do as president. That's not what I do as commander in chief,"
Obama said.

The first debate, on Oct. 3, Romney's strong performance and Obama's lackluster
responses helped Romney end a monthlong string of bad news and missteps that
contributed to a long slide in the polls, particularly in key swing states.

Since the debate, Romney has overtaken Obama in Gallup's daily tracking poll of
likely voters nationwide, and closed the gap in several battleground states,
including Florida, Virginia and Ohio.

"The president stood tall and stood up to Romney and his statements," said
former Democratic U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy of Bucks County. That could help
Obama make gains with undecided voters, and energize partisans demoralized after
the last debate, Murphy said. "He showed them competence, and that was what he
needed to do."

Obama was more "aggressive and prepared" than in the first debate, "but he was
unable to defend the big picture because it's so grim," said Brad Todd, a
Washington-based Republican strategist.

"Gov. Romney proved for the second debate in a row that he is sharp on his feet
and more than prepared to be president," Todd said. "That's the central
challenge of debates for a challenger and he came through it with flying
colors."

The two stood face to face during an exchange on energy policy, when Romney
challenged Obama, saying oil drilling permits on federal lands fell in the last
four years. Obama rose from his chair and said that wasn't true, Romney
continued asking him, "how much did you cut them by," as Obama said overall oil
production had increased.

Romney said the test for an oil policy is whether gas prices are lower now than
they were before the plan was implemented. They were about $1.90 a gallon when
Obama took office and are about $3.77 now. Obama said the reason prices were so
low then was because the economy was on the brink of collapse.

One undecided voter asked Romney to differentiate himself from Obama's
predecessor, Republican President George W. Bush, which has been a main point of
attack from Obama's campaign.

"I'll crack down on China. President Bush didn't," Romney said, adding that he'd
also sign more free trade agreements. "I'm going to get us to a balanced budget.
President Bush didn't."

Obama criticized investments made when Romney ran Bain Capital, an investment
firm, which Obama said included companies that helped outsource jobs to China.

"Governor, you're the last person who's going to get tough on China," Obama
said.

"As far as town hall debates go, it had its share of fireworks," said Jeff
Brauer, a political science professor at Keystone College. "Usually, this format
focuses much more on the audience and their concerns. Tuesday night, though,
much of the time was spent on direct arguments between the candidates
themselves."

Obama plans to campaign at Cornell College in Mt. Vernon, Iowa, and Ohio
University in Athens. Romney is scheduled to campaign in Virginia, at Tidewater
Community College in Chesapeake and then at Ida Park in Leesburg.

The final debate is scheduled to take place Monday at Lynn University in Boca
Raton, Fla.

Mike Wereschagin and Salena Zito are a staff writers for Trib Total Media.
Wereschagin can be reached at 412-320-7900 or mwereschagin@tribweb.com Zito can
be reached at szito@tribweb.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2012 Tribune Review Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
