
                              66 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Candidates spar in bid for women's vote;
Romney recounts effort to hire women; Obama highlights birth control

BYLINE: MICHAEL D. SHEAR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1145 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

ABSTRACT

In their second debate, President Barack Obama pressed Mitt Romney on
contraceptives and appealed to the "female breadwinner," while Mr. Romney
recounted his effort to hire more women.

FULL TEXT

President Barack Obama asserted on Tuesday night that Mitt Romney's policies
were economically threatening to women as both men clashed repeatedly in their
second debate over who would best serve the interests of the United States'
largest and most critical constituency.

Facing some sporadic evidence that Mr. Romney was gaining support among women in
the final weeks of the campaign, Mr. Obama seized on every opportunity to
declare that his Republican rival would eliminate funds for women's health
services, block access to contraceptives, oppose equal pay and undermine the
economic recovery for families often led by female breadwinners.

''This is not just a women's issue,'' Mr. Obama said during an exchange about
equal pay for women in the workplace. ''This is a family issue. This is a
middle-class issue. And that's why we've got to fight for it.''

Mr. Romney sought to defend his policies as better for women, denying Mr.
Obama's accusations about contraception and insisting that his record as
governor of Massachusetts was one of inclusion and equality. Even as the debate
concluded, Mr. Romney's campaign released a television ad emphasizing that he
does not oppose contraception and believes abortions should be legal in some
cases.

''Turns out, Romney doesn't oppose contraception at all,'' a woman in the ad
says. ''In fact, he thinks abortions should be an option in cases of rape,
incest or to save a mother's life.''

But Mr. Romney's rambling description of his efforts to hire women into his
administration as governor became an instant Internet sensation when he said he
had ''whole binders full of women'' that he considered for jobs in his cabinet
and agencies.

''I said, well, gosh, can't we find some women that are also qualified?'' Mr.
Romney said during the debate. ''And so we took a concerted effort to go out and
find women who had backgrounds that could be qualified to become members of our
cabinet.''

The ''binders full'' comment was a hit on Twitter, quickly became a ''meme''
that generated a mocking Tumblr page and prompted a Democratic group to buy up
the page www.bindersfullofwomen.com. The group, American Bridge-21st Century,
used it to list Mr. Romney's actions they said were contrary to women's
interests.

The appeals to women came during a debate in which Mr. Obama and Mr. Romney also
sought to energize their core voters as early voting accelerated and Election
Day approached. Mr. Obama, in particular, delivered an aggressive performance
that advisers hoped would give his core supporters fresh evidence that he was
ready to fight for a second term.

Mr. Romney pressed his case for tax cuts, a favorite of conservatives, and the
administration's changing story about the attacks in Libya, where Republicans
believe they have an advantage. Mr. Romney repeated his campaign mantra that the
United States could not afford another four years like the ones Mr. Obama has
presided over.

But there was no mistaking both candidates' focus on women. That focus has
increased dramatically in the final weeks of the campaign as the overall race
has tightened nationally and in many of the most important battleground states.
Mr. Obama has long maintained a double-digit lead among women in most surveys,
helping him to overcome a deficit among men.

A poll this week by Gallup suggested that Mr. Obama's advantage had evaporated,
though other surveys - and Mr. Obama's top strategists - disputed that finding.

As the debate made clear, however, neither campaign was taking the support of
women for granted. Mr. Obama, in particular, seemed eager to make the case for
his policies - and to criticize Mr. Romney's -after having been faulted by many
high-profile women for not doing so during his first debate with his Republican
rival.

The president went out of his way several times to mention Mr. Romney's pledge
to eliminate funds for Planned Parenthood. Mr. Obama argued that would not only
affect women's health services but would also be an economic burden on families
during tough times.

''Millions of women all across the country who rely on Planned Parenthood for
not just contraceptive care,'' Mr. Obama said. ''They rely on it for mammograms,
for cervical cancer screenings. That's a pocketbook issue for women and families
all across the country.''

On the question of contraception, Mr. Obama asserted that Mr. Romney would allow
employers to decide whether to provide contraception coverage in their insurance
plans, an option foreclosed by the president's health care law. Mr. Romney
denied that accusation.

''I don't believe that bureaucrats in Washington should tell someone whether
they can use contraceptives or not, and I don't believe employers should tell
someone whether they could have contraceptive care or not,'' Mr. Romney said,
using time from another question to try and rebut the president. ''Every woman
in America should have access to contraceptives.''

''Governor, that's not true,'' Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Romney sought to connect the interests of women to the broader issue of the
economy's sluggish recovery, suggesting repeatedly that he could do better for
struggling families - and especially women - if he were in the White House.

''There are three and a half million more women living in poverty today than
when the president took office,'' Mr. Romney said. ''We don't have to live like
this. We can get this economy going again.''

But it was a question about equal pay for women that elicited the most memorable
exchange of the debate. Mr. Obama focused on passage of the Lilly Ledbetter Act
- the first bill he signed as president - which makes it easier for women to sue
if they suspect they are not being paid fairly.

''So we fixed that,'' Mr. Obama said. ''And that's an example of the kind of
advocacy that we need because women are increasingly the breadwinners in the
family.''

When it was Mr. Romney's turn, he described the efforts he made after being
elected governor to make sure that women were well represented in his
administration. He said the early recommendations were mostly men, and that he
pushed harder to search for qualified women to serve.

That led to the ''binders full'' comment and to a description of his willingness
to be flexible about the hours that his chief of staff - a woman named Beth
Meyers, who is now a top adviser to his campaign - worked while raising
children.

''She said, 'I can't be here until 7:00 or 8:00 at night. I need to be able to
get home at 5:00 so I can be there for - making dinner for my kids and being
with them when they get home from school,''' Mr. Romney explained. ''So we said,
fine, let's have a flexible schedule so you can have hours that work for you.''

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
