
                              67 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Met 2 Edition

Race likely to be bitter until the bitter end

BYLINE: Dan Balz

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: HEMPSTEAD, N.Y.


HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. - No one thought the second debate between President Obama and
Mitt Romney would be like the first one, and it certainly wasn't. The question
is how much Tuesday's sharply contested forum will arrest the movement toward
Romney that has shaken up the race in the past two weeks.

Unlike the exchange in Denver, Tuesday's debate at Hofstra University was not a
mismatch between an aggressive and focused Romney and a lackluster and unfocused
Obama. Instead, it was marked by tough and testy exchanges between two
candidates who have opposing policies and who knew they had much to lose if they
didn't do well.

Unlike in the first debate, Romney was on the defensive as much as or more than
he was on the offensive. It was clear from the opening minutes Tuesday that
Democrats, who were deeply disappointed by Obama's performance in Denver, were
elated by the president they saw on stage. He passed up no opportunity to attack
his rival and to challenge his record, just as Romney had done last time.

The candidates did not come to play nice. They squabbled over facts. They
interrupted each other. They circled each other. They invaded each other's
space. If town-hall-style debates are supposed to be forums in which the
candidates focus on the voters onstage, this was one in which they often seemed
to ignore their questioners so they could slug it out one on one.

Romney and Obama have one more debate, on Monday at Lynn University in Boca
Raton, Fla. Although the focus of the final forum is foreign policy, it will be
a time for the candidates to make their closing arguments to try to woo
undecided voters and motivate their respective bases, whose enthusiasm becomes
crucial in a close contest.

But after what happened at Hofstra, it's clear that the real competition will be
the fight to the finish, a battle for the battleground states where the election
will be decided. The most important are Virginia, Florida and Ohio - with Ohio
being perhaps first among equals. After that come Iowa, Colorado and New
Hampshire, Nevada, North Carolina and Wisconsin.

Few events have changed the race as quickly or dramatically as the first debate.
Romney's clear victory over Obama in Denver turned around the campaign
narrative, which was heading toward a premature conclusion that the contest was
virtually over. It also shifted polls, both nationally and in the battleground
states.

How many minds will be changed by what happened on Tuesday night? There is
likely to be a boost in enthusiasm among Obama loyalists, and that's not
insignificant. Given that some parts of his coalition, young voters in
particular, are not as motivated as they were four years ago, that jolt of
energy could be important. Obama advisers know that turning out their voters
will be harder for them than it will be for Romney's team.

But Romney's initial performance did much to generate enthusiasm among his
supporters. That's not likely to be diminished by Tuesday's debate. After
Denver, Republicans began to think it was possible to win. Their enthusiasm
going forward is unlikely to slacken. The turnout battle from now until Election
Day will be as fiercely fought as was the battle at Hofstra.

One of the keys to the outcome will be women, and a big question from Tuesday's
debate is how women will react to what they saw. Romney appeared to be making
progress in reducing Obama's big margins among female voters in the past two
weeks. But he may have hurt himself.

Just as Vice President Biden's smiles and laughs during his debate with GOP vice
presidential nominee Paul Ryan (Wis.) last week turned off some voters, Romney's
efforts to push back against CNN's Candy Crowley, who served as moderator, could
alienate some women.

Heading into the second debate, there was little disagreement that a race that
had seemed to be slipping away from Romney in September was back to what
strategists in both parties had predicted would be a competitive contest to the
end.

In the hours before the exchange, the Romney and Obama campaigns offered
genuinely conflicting and perhaps self-serving assessments of how things stood -
in the battlegrounds and among key demographic groups.

Take the state of play in Ohio. Before Denver, Obama had a clear and, in some
polls, big lead. In a pre-debate appearance Tuesday in the spin room, Sen. Rob
Portman (R-Ohio) told reporters that the race there was even. "Our own tracking
indicates it's a dead heat," he said.

Portman, who has played the president in Romney's debate preparations, said that
before Denver, the challenger was behind by "a big gap," but added that Romney
has made steady progress since then. "Frankly, it wasn't just a bump after the
debate."

Jim Messina, Obama's campaign manager, offered a counterview. He said the first
debate may have tightened the race, but added that the contest always was
destined to close in the final month. He also said that Obama was still strong
in the Midwest - Ohio, Iowa and Wisconsin.

"We continue to have more pathways to 270 votes than Romney," he said. "All of
our pathways are still there. We are where we need to be."

What voters saw Tuesday night was just how big the choice will be in November.
Romney and Obama painted dire pictures of what will happen if the other is
elected in three weeks. Voters may have heard this before, but it was more
sharply etched, with the candidates standing only a few feet apart, than in the
television commercials or campaign appearances.

Now the campaign turns to fundamentals - one more debate and then a sprint to
Nov. 6. The race has been long and hard-fought, but Obama and Romney showed
Tuesday night that they have plenty left for the final stretch, and their teams
are ready for what comes next.

balzd@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
