
                              69 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                             The New Zealand Herald

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

"Fired-up" Obama on attack in round two

SECTION: NEWS; World

LENGTH: 896 words


A fired-up President Barack Obama persistently attacked Republican challenger
Mitt Romney in a critical debate today, offering a striking contrast from his
listless performance two weeks ago that appeared to damage his re-election
prospects.

Obama blasted Romney"s economic plans as harmful to the middle class and accused
him of flip-flopping on issues like energy and gun control. He appeared angry -
a rare emotion seen in the famously cool Obama - when Romney, a former
Massachusetts governor, criticized his response to the deadly attack that killed
the US ambassador to Libya and three other Americans at the US Consulate in
Benghazi last month.

He pointedly told Romney that any suggestion that his administration "would play
politics or mislead when we"ve lost four of our own, governor, is offensive.
That"s not what we do."

The stakes of the town hall-style debate at Hofstra University, just outside New
York, could not have been higher. With just three weeks to go before Election
Day, the race is locked in a dead heat and many Americans are already casting
ballots in states that allow early voting.

The open-stage format, with no physical objects between them, placed incumbent
and challenger face to face and, when they chose, directly in each other"s
faces. Their physical encounters crackled with energy and tension, and the crowd
watched raptly as the two sparred while struggling to appear calm and affable
before a national television audience of tens of millions.

It is not clear whether the debate will help Obama regain the momentum he lost
after his poor performance in the Oct. 3 debate, which helped fuel a rise in
opinion polls by Romney. But his forcefulness was bound to cheer supporters
disheartened by his previous performance.

Romney also gave his supporters reasons to cheer. He appeared confident and
comfortable, as he had been in the first debate, and aggressively returned Obama
"s fire. Romney said the middle class "has been crushed over the last four
years," and that 23 million Americans are struggling to find work.

Economic growth has been slow throughout Obama"s term in office, and
unemployment only recently dipped below 8 per cent for the first time since he
moved into the White House. Romney noted that if out-of-work Americans who no
longer look for jobs were counted, the unemployment rate would be 10.7 per cent.

Romney described the deadly Libya attack as part of an unraveling of the
administration"s foreign policy. He said it took Obama a long time to admit the
episode had been a terrorist attack, but Obama said he had said so the day after
the attack in an appearance at the White House. When moderator Candy Crowley of
CNN said the president had in fact done so, Obama, prompted, "Say that a little
louder, Candy."

According to the transcript, Obama said on Sept. 12, "No acts of terror will
ever shake the resolve of this great nation, alter that character or eclipse the
light of the values that we stand for."

Romney also repeated a pledge to declare China a currency manipulator on his
first day in office. "We can compete with anyone in the world as long as the
playing field is level," he said. "China"s been cheating over the years" by
holding down the value of its currency and stealing intellectual property.

Obama told Romney that "you"re the last person who"s going to get tough on
China." He has charged that Romney made money from companies that outsourced
jobs to China while running the private equity firm Bain Capital.

The two men interrupted one another often, speaking over each other to the point
that neither could be understood.

"You"ll get your chance in a moment. I"m still speaking," Romney said as he
tried to cut off Obama at one point.

Obama is fighting to hang on to small leads in many of the nine key swing states
that likely will decide the election. The so-called battleground states those
that do not reliably vote either Republican or Democratic take on outsized
importance in the US system, in which presidents are chosen not by the
nationwide popular vote but in state-by-state contests.

From the opening moments, Obama was aggressive. He criticized Romney"s
opposition to the Democrats" bailout of the auto industry and rejected Romney"s
economic proposals as squeezing the middle class.

"Gov. Romney says he"s got a five-point plan. Gov. Romney doesn"t have a
five-point plan. He has a one-point plan. And that plan is to make sure that
folks at the top play by a different set of rules," Obama said.

This debate was before an audience of 80 uncommitted voters selected by the
Gallup Organization who posed questions to the candidates. Crowley chose
speakers after reviewing their proposed questions to avoid repeats.

Obama needed to strike the right balance in coming on strong against Romney
without turning off the audience and millions of television viewers by going too
negative. Obama has said his first debate performance was "too polite."

While most of the debate was focused on policy differences, there was one
more-personal moment, when Obama raised the issue of Romney"s investments in
China.

"Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?" Romney interrupted.

"You know, I don"t look at my pension. It"s not as big as yours," shot back
Obama to his wealthier rival.

Only one more debate, next Monday (Tuesday NZ time), remains after this faceoff
and that one deals with foreign policy.

- AP

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 The New Zealand Herald
                              All Rights Reserved
