
                              70 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                 Jerusalem Post

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Libya puts Obama back on top. US president rebounds in second debate with Romney

BYLINE: HILARY LEILA KRIEGER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 877 words


WASHINGTON/NEW YORK - For all the choppy waters of unemployment, foreclosure and
soaring debt that have buffeted US President Barack Obama's reelection efforts,
foreign policy is one realm where he enjoyed smooth sailing for almost all of
the 2012 campaign.

All of it up until September 11, when terrorists in Benghazi, Libya killed four
American diplomats, including the first US ambassador to be assassinated since
1979.

After months of polls consistently showing Obama winning on national security,
his competitor Mitt Romney suddenly had a line of attack.

Republican members of Congress seized upon the opening with hearings exploring
whether the administration had been negligent before and after the attack. And
the GOP nominee himself has gone after the president on Libya from the campaign
trail.

One month later, on October 16, the tide turned. At Tuesday night's debate,
Obama defused his biggest foreign policy liability during a question on Libya.

The question to the president was anything but friendly. A member of the
audience, Kerry Ladka, rose at the town hall-style debate to ask a question
about the State Department's refusal to provide extra security that had been
requested for American staff in Libya.

"Who was it that denied enhanced security, and why?" he asked the president,
echoing critics of the administration.

But by the end of the ensuing exchange, Obama had wrested the advantage from
Romney.

Romney accused Obama of not labeling the Benghazi incident an act of terror
until two weeks after it happened, but Obama replied that he had immediately
called it that.

"The day after the attack, governor, I stood in the Rose Garden and I told the
American people and the world that we are going to find out exactly what
happened, that this was an act of terror," Obama said.

The two presidential candidates then engaged in a back-and-forth over whether
that was true, with Romney expressing incredulity and Obama telling him to check
the transcript.

The Rose Garden transcript records that Obama said, "No acts of terror will ever
shake the resolve of this great nation, alter that character, or eclipse the
light of the values that we stand for." He was speaking in the context of the
Benghazi killings, but also the 9/11 attacks.

His words left enough room for Republicans to claim Romney was correct, but the
debate moderator, CNN's Candy Crowley, called it for Obama as the candidates
continued to drag out the argument.

"He did call it an act of terror," she said.

She added, "It did, as well, take two weeks or so for the whole idea of there
being a riot out there about this tape to come out." But the essential point was
scored by Obama, and the exchange was frequently cited in post-debate analysis
as a strong moment for Obama and even a turning point in the debate.

There were other reasons Obama was seen as having won the debate (46 percent to
39% in a CNN poll and 37% to 30% in a CBS survey). For one, he came back to life
and took the offensive after a lackluster first outing. He also pounded Romney
on vulnerable points, like his statements about the 47% of Americans who don't
pay income taxes. Romney did some of his own damage - offering the twitterati
the image of "binders full of women," for example.

But on Libya, Obama's response was more substantive and powerful. He directly
challenged Romney and emerged victorious. Obama coupled that with a clear
acceptance of fault - even though US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had
taken responsibility ahead of the debate - that could do much to soothe the
controversy.

"Secretary Clinton has done an extraordinary job, but she works for me. I'm the
president, and I'm always responsible," Obama said.

And to accusations from Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, that Obama
blamed the deaths in Libya on an anti-Muslim video in place of acknowledging
resurgent terror activity, the president offered one of his most impassioned
lines of the evening.

"The suggestion that anybody on my team... would play politics or mislead when
we've lost four of our own, governor, is offensive. That's not what we do," he
stressed.

"That's not what I do as president. That's not what I do as commander-in-chief."

Next Monday's debate, the final one before the November 6 vote, is slated to
focus entirely on foreign policy, so Romney will have a chance to hit Obama on
the topic again - perhaps even to retry the issue of whether Obama called it a
terror attack in the Rose Garden.

Romney also sounded other prongs of attack he will likely return to next week
when he argued Tuesday night that the incident had broader implications about
Obama's Middle East policy.

"This calls into question the president's whole policy in the Middle East,"
Romney said, describing that strategy as "unraveling before our very eyes."

"Look what's happening in Syria, in Egypt, now in Libya. Consider the distance
between ourselves and Israel," he continued.

"We have Iran four years closer to a nuclear bomb."

But it was clear that the foreign policy issue that has most captured the
American public in the closing months of the campaign was the Libya argument -
it was the sole question asked by a member of the audience last night. With the
answer, Romney lost the foreign policy advantage he briefly enjoyed.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

NOTES: ANALYSIS

GRAPHIC: Photo: US REPUBLICAN nominee Mitt Romney and US President Barack Obama
speak to each other during the second presidential debate in Hempstead, New York
on Tuesday night. (Credit: Mike Segar/Reuters)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2012 The Jerusalem Post
                              All Rights Reserved
