
                              72 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                  Times Colonist (Victoria, British Columbia)

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

Obama goes on attack, as Romney counters

BYLINE: David Lauter, Tribune Washington Bureau

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 701 words


A newly energetic and aggressive U.S. President Barack Obama went directly after
his Republican challenger within the first minutes of their second presidential
debate Tuesday night, attacking Mitt Romney's business record and his opposition
to helping the automobile industry in 2009.

"Governor Romney says he's got a five-point plan. Governor Romney doesn't have a
five-point plan; he has a one-point plan," Obama said during his answer to the
debate's first question.

Romney's plan was to "make sure that folks at the top play by a different set of
rules" he added, making quick references to lower tax rates for the wealthy,
companies sending jobs overseas and corporate takeovers that "strip away"
pensions from workers and "still make money" for owners.

Within the debate's first six minutes, Obama had twice accused Romney of saying
things that were "not true."

Romney quickly countered by challenging Obama over his administration's record
of oil production on public lands and coal mining. "The proof" that Obama's
energy policy isn't working "is the price of gasoline at the pump," Romney said.

For both men, the attack lines reprised themes that their campaigns have
stressed in advertising that has saturated the airwaves in battleground states.
Obama used another line familiar from his ads also immediately, pivoting from a
question about job prospects for college students to talk about Romney's
opposition to the bailout of the auto industry in 2009. "We would have lost a
million jobs" under Romney's approach, he said.

The sharply worded exchanges bore out pre-debate predictions that Obama would
more aggressively challenge Romney in this debate than he had in the first one.
After a distinctly lacklustre performance in the first debate, which left
Democrats demoralized, Obama was under great pressure to try to create a
turnaround in the second encounter.

The race between the two men has been extremely close and static most of the
time since late spring. Because of that general lack of movement, the two times
the race has shifted significantly have taken on outsized importance.

The first shift took place during and just after the Democratic convention. With
the help of former President Bill Clinton, Obama pulled wavering voters over to
his side and took a small, but significant, lead nationally and in virtually all
the battleground states. That lead grew a bit larger after Romney suffered from
a series of mistakes that generated two weeks of bad news for him, most notably
the public release of videotape in which he told a fundraising lunch that 47 per
cent of Americans pay no taxes, are dependent on government and can't be reached
by his campaign.

Then came the second shifting point, the initial debate. Voters who had
previously been on the fence said they found Romney forceful and persuasive.
Perhaps just as importantly, Romney's performance revived enthusiasm among
Republican partisans, while Obama's lacklustre demeanour and failure to respond
forcefully to his challenger demoralized some Democrats.

The impact quickly showed up in polls as Romney picked up the support of
Republican-leaning waverers. As before, the movement was not huge - an average
of three to four points - but it erased most of the lead Obama had enjoyed, to
return the race to the near-tie that had prevailed most of the summer and to
send many of the president's supporters into a deep funk.

As the second debate approached, Romney appeared to have taken at least a small
lead in at least one major battleground, Florida, and he was pouring resources
into others, particularly Ohio and Virginia, in the hopes of establishing a
clear path toward a majority in the Electoral College. Obama appeared to be
holding on, at least for now, in several key states.

Obama's task at the debate was to revive the enthusiasm of his supporters in
order to drive up turnout and to begin the process of wooing back some of the
undecided who had drifted Romney's way. Aides said they were particularly
focused on female voters. Obama's lead over Romney in September had depended in
large part on strong support from blue-collar women, and several polls had shown
him losing ground with them since the first debate.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: David Goldman, Associated Press; Republican presidential nominee Mitt
Romney passes President Barack Obama during the second presidential debate at
Hofstra University, Tuesday, in Hempstead, New York.;

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


Copyright 2012 Times Colonist, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc.

                              All Rights Reserved
