
                              75 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                        The International Herald Tribune

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

Obama bares his teeth

BYLINE: BY FRANK BRUNI

SECTION: EDIT; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: NYT

ABSTRACT

For this debate, the president honed a whole new ferocity.

FULL TEXT

Of the various debate formats, the town-hall configuration is the one that's
supposed to tamp down conflict and muffle fireworks. Not Tuesday night.

From the opening minutes, Denver's pacifist was Long Island's pugilist. In
moving  away from a first-debate performance that had pundits mining their
thesauruses for synonyms for ''sleepy,'' President Obama found his pep and his
punch. Above all, he found his ability to say ''liar,'' or some approximation of
it.

''What Governor Romney said just isn't true,'' Obama insisted right near the
start, after Mitt Romney had characterized his and the president's actions and
intentions back when the auto industry was in crisis. Minutes later: ''Very
little of what Governor Romney just said is true.'' This was Obama responding to
Romney's denigration of the administration's energy policy.

''Not true, Governor Romney, not true,'' Obama interjected just minutes after
that, as Romney continued to talk about energy.

''It's just not true, it's just not true,'' Obama added, keeping at it, not
letting up. At this point only about 20 minutes had elapsed. There were 70 to
go, and  many accusations of mendacity to come.

For Obama, this debate was a sort of make-up exam: he muffed his first try. And
his special challenge was to show some teeth (though not quite as many as Joe
Biden) in a usually touchy-feely, town-hall setting not ideally suited to that.
He needed to make like a shark in a tank meant for guppies.

And that might have looked menacing and overbearing if Romney hadn't been so
happy-eager, even-to play the predator as well, the two of them swimming right
up to each other, circling each other, seemingly poised to shred some flesh and
draw some blood, especially during a dispute toward the end about Obama's
response to the Benghazi attack.

Obama said that right after the attack, in the Rose Garden, he'd called it an
''act of terror.'' Romney tried to correct him.

''Get the transcript,'' Obama fumed, at which point the moderator, Candy
Crowley, vouched for Obama's memory.

''Can you say that a little louder, Candy?'' Obama teasingly implored her.

All those knives that Obama didn't take out during the previous debate? They
were present and shiny and flying through the air. This time around he
challenged Romney on social issues, comparing him to the last Republican
president and saying: ''He's gone to a more extreme place when it comes to
social policy.''

He called out the hazy, incomplete arithmetic of Romney's budget plans. He
underscored Romney's flips and highlighted Romney's flops. He provided an
exhaustive (and sometimes exhausting) tutorial on every immoderate position
Romney had taken during the Republican primaries. And he spelled Romney's name
with dollar signs, noting that Romney had paid a relatively low tax rate and had
investments overseas.

This prompted an exchange for the ages, rife with double entendre.

''Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?'' Romney asked, making the
point that blind trusts and diversified funds often invest some money overseas.
''Have you looked at your pension?'' He repeated the question several times.

''I don't look at my pension,'' Obama answered. ''It's not as big as yours.''

It was an extraordinary debate in several regards. At times the candidates
communicated such potent disrespect-even disdain-for each other that you had to
remind yourself that one was the president of the United States and one wanted
to be. They contradicted, belittled and spoke over each other in a manner more
raw than dignified.

And yet both demonstrated that for all the shallowness and corruption of our
political process, it has given us two finalists of considerable brainpower and
firepower. Romney's ability to riffle through Obama's record and pluck out the
tiniest and most unflattering details was remarkable. Obama's ability to do that
with Romney's political history was even more so.

In a disciplined and often effective manner, Romney kept to his best pitch: you
may have questions and doubts about my proposals, but you have a verdict on his
record, all four years of it. Appraising the size of ongoing federal deficits,
Romney declared: ''This puts us on a road to Greece.''

This was the rare presidential debate moderated by a woman, so perhaps it was
fitting that the run-up to it was all about women voters.

How, oh how, to court them? Obama could remind voters of his minority status in
a household ruled by them-Michelle, Sasha and Malia - and, sure enough, he
mentioned his daughters more than once.

Romney's household is the reverse, with Ann outnumbered by him and five sons.
But given his talent for recasting his past and changing his shape, I half
expected him to claim that he'd once been a woman, though I suppose that would
bring up a new set of  problems.

What Romney did do was point out that women share the concerns of all voters,
and that a bad economy devastates women as much as anybody else. ''There are
three and a half million more women living in poverty than when the president
took office,'' he said.

There was much predebate debate about  whether Crowley  was supposed to be
decorative or influential, a throw pillow with a pulse or a referee with a
purpose. She chose referee, and good for her, because the candidates needed
that.

Obama did himself considerable good, changing a rap on him that had metastasized
beyond belief over the last two weeks. In today's media climate, an impression
becomes a conclusion becomes a cataclysm, and the next thing you know, he hadn't
merely underperformed in Denver, in the agitated estimation of excitable
pundits. He had just about thrown away the election.

And so on Tuesday night, he needed not only to stand up to Romney, but also to
prove that he had the burning desire and intensity for a second term.

With his mantra of liar, liar, he found that fire.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                  Copyright 2012 International Herald Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
