
                              76 of 1098 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            October 16, 2012 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

First debates show the core arguments of each campaign

BYLINE: David A. Fahrenthold

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 1115 words


It took three hours and 33,000-plus words, including 57 mentions of "jobs,"
seven "Bibi's" and one "Big Bird." But the first two debates revealed something
that long months of speechifying had not: two campaigns, stripped down to their
core arguments.

On Tuesday night, President Obama and Mitt Romney will take the stage again, in
a town-hall style debate at Hofstra University in New York. This meeting may
have a different tone from their first - Obama, in particular, is under pressure
to be more aggressive. But both candidates seem likely to return to the same
basic sales pitch.

Romney and his running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan (Wis.), have focused largely on
their policy agenda, which was dominated by things they wanted to roll back -
the health-care law, the Dodd-Frank financial regulations, income-tax rates.

The Democrats tend to cast the election less as a choice between ideas and more
as a choice between people. Both Obama and Vice President Biden stressed their
personal credibility, citing their work in office and the lessons of their
upbringing. They attacked Romney and Ryan as aloof and uncaring.

"Look, folks, use your common sense," Biden said Thursday night - talking
specifically about Social Security, but also compressing the Democratic appeal
into two sentences. "Who do you trust on this?"

The importance of the campaign's first two debates was made clear in recent days
by the zeal with which Obama and Romney prepared for the third. They sequestered
themselves in swing-state hotels - Romney in Ohio, Obama in Virginia - engaging
in mock debates at the expense of real-life campaigning.

It was worth it, the campaigns calculated, because of the powerful impact the
first debate had on the race. The slow and steady gains that Obama had
consolidated last month were all but erased by his poor showing.

The vice-presidential debate, as usual, had less of an impact. Both sides were
pleased with the performances by Biden and Ryan, but the sole vice-presidential
debate does not appear to have fundamentally changed the race.

The final debate will be held on Monday in Florida and will focus on foreign
policy.

Still, even if the first debates left the race itself muddled, they served to
clarify the messages at each campaign's heart.

That's because, for once, there were time limits. Some issues had to be left
out. None of the candidates, for instance, has mentioned climate change,
immigration or same-sex marriage.

And - just four years after Obama built his candidacy around a promise to change
Washington's partisan culture - this year, the two nominees had to be prompted
into talking about it at all. Romney said he'd sit down with Democrats on Day
One. But Obama noted that Romney also wants to start rolling back the
health-care law that day.

So, Obama implied, Democrats would already be mad.

The arguments the two sides did put forward, in their limited time onstage,
signaled sharply different theories about what voters want.

Romney and Ryan seemed to imagine the American electorate like a business trying
to hire a contractor.

In that view, voters would want to see a work plan first, even if some details
were left negotiable. Ryan seemed to mock Obama for not understanding that and
leaving out details of his plan to reduce the deficit.

"That's what we get in this administration: speeches," Ryan said. "But we're not
getting leadership."

In the debates, the two Republicans did spend some time talking about Romney's
business experience and generosity. Ryan, for instance, told a story about
Romney helping members of his church, whose two sons had been left paralyzed by
an auto accident.

"Mitt Romney's a good man. He cares about 100 percent of Americans in this
country," Ryan said.

But the two Republicans spent far more time talking about their ideas to
strengthen the country's military, and to pare back other parts of government.

In many cases, the two still left the details of these ideas fuzzy. Romney said
he wanted replacement bills on health care and financial regulation but spelled
out only a few specifics. He also declined to specify how he would cut tax
breaks, to make sure that tax revenue wouldn't decline when overall rates are
reduced.

"I come in and lay down a piece of legislation and say, 'It's my way or the
highway,' I don't get a lot done," Romney said.

The Democrats had a different idea about what voters wanted: Obama and Biden
seemed to imagine the public like a football team trying to hire a coach. So
they would care about personality, and experience, more than any specific list
of plays.

It was a decision that could, and should, be made with one's gut.

"Folks, follow your instincts on this one," Biden said during his debate,
talking specifically about Medicare.

Both Democrats dwelled on one specific policy idea: the proposed "Buffett Rule,"
which would raise tax rates on some high earners.

But not many others. Obama, in fact, lapsed into a familiar campaign-trail
habit: phrasing his second-term agenda in terms of questions, not answers. "How
do we deal with our tax code? And how do we make sure that we are reducing
spending in a responsible way?" he said in the debate with Romney.

To make the argument that Democrats should be trusted to answer questions like
these, Obama and Biden cited their efforts to bail out General Motors, the
imposition of sanctions against Iran and the successful mission to kill Osama
bin Laden.

Biden stressed his long experience in foreign-policy matters - especially after
Ryan referred to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu by the familiar
nickname "Bibi."

In Biden's response, he used the same nickname three times in two sentences.

"Now, with regard to Bibi - who's been my friend 39 years - the president has
met with Bibi a dozen times," Biden said. "He's spoken to Bibi Netanyahu as much
as he's spoken to anybody." Three more "Bibi's" followed before the end of the
debate.

Biden also attacked Romney as untrustworthy, citing the secretly videotaped
speech in which Romney said 47 percent of the U.S. population consider
themselves  "victims."

"He's talking about my mother and father. He's talking about the places I grew
up in," Biden said.

So what would Biden and Obama do for those people?

True to form, Biden didn't mention a specific bill or even an idea for a bill.
Instead, he described the noble - and highly intangible - goals that he and
Obama share.

"The president and I are not going to rest until that playing field is leveled,
they, in fact, have a clear shot and they have peace of mind," Biden said.
"Until they can turn to their kid and say with a degree of confidence: 'Honey,
it's going to be okay. It's going to be okay.'â[#x20ac][#x2c6]"

fahrenthold@washpost.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2012 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved
