
                              79 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                             The Nation (Thailand)

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday

race for white houseAGGRESSIVE OBAMA OUTPUNCHES ROMNEY IN the second
debateSurveys by CNN, other organisations show a more combative Obama comes out
the clear winner against Romney

BYLINE: The Nation

LENGTH: 1007 words


Agence France-Presse

Hempstead, New York

President Barack Obama hammered Mitt Romney on Libya and his corporate past on
Tuesday as he got the better of his Republican challenger in a fiery debate
three weeks from election day.

Bouncing back after being pilloried even by his own Democrats for appearing
passive and listless during their first encounter in Denver, Obama was a
different character on stage at New York's Hofstra University.

Instant surveys by CNN, which hosted the debate, and a host of other media
organisations showed the more aggressive and combative Obama came out the clear
winner against Romney, who spent more of the night on the back foot.

Rebounding from the ropes after a dismal showing two weeks ago that sent his
poll numbers tumbling, the president was aware a second poor outing could doom
him to the historical ignominy of a single term.

Early signs were that Obama's passion-fuelled performance will revive optimism
among Democrats over his re-election bid even if Romney made a strongly worded
case that the president had presided over economic failure.

In one spellbinding exchange, Obama stared directly at Romney and rebuked him
over his criticism of the White House's handling of an attack on the US
consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on September 11, which killed four Americans.

"The suggestion that anybody on my team, whether it's a secretary of state, our
UN ambassador, anybody on my team, would play politics or mislead when we've
lost four of our own, governor, is offensive," Obama said, wagging his finger at
Romney across the stage of the town hall-style debate.

"That's not what we do. That's not what I do as president, not what I do as
commander-in-chief," Obama said, in the most memorable clash of one of the most
ill-tempered and contentious White House debates ever.

Seeking to recover, Romney then seemed to stumble, accusing the president of
taking days to call the attack â[#x20ac]" which killed US ambassador to Libya
Chris Stevens â[#x20ac]" terrorism.

Obama snapped back that he had referred to the assault as an "act of terror" a
day after the attack, telling Romney: "Check the transcript" before fixing his
rival with a withering stare and saying "Please proceed, governor."

CNN moderator Candy Crowley fact-checked on the spot in Obama's favour and the
transcript of the president's Rose Garden remarks on September 12 confirmed that
he did imply the assault was terrorism.

"No acts of terror will ever shake the resolve of this great nation," Obama said
in the remarks, which contradict Republican claims he laid the blame fully on an
anti-Muslim YouTube video made on US soil.

Even before the debate had ended, Democrats were seizing on the moment to
question Romney's credentials to serve as commander-in-chief, while
conservatives hammered Crowley for what they said was an unfair intervention.

As anger crackled in the debate hall, the candidates were freed from podiums and
roamed the floor, often encroaching on each other's personal space.

Minutes into the clash, the two stood just a few feet apart, trading charge and
counter-charge over economic policy.

Romney's strongest moments came when he delivered stinging indictments of the
Obama economy, charging the president with failing to rein in stubbornly high
unemployment or cut ballooning deficits.

"The president wants to do well, I understand," Romney said, adopting a
sorrowful tone of voice. "But the policies he put in place have not let this
economy take off as it could have."

Obama slammed Romney over his attitude on women's issues, but the former
Massachusetts governor and multi-millionaire businessman hit back over debt.

"If the president were re-elected, we'd go to almost $20 trillion (Bt612.5
trillion) of national debt. This puts us on a road to Greece," he said, before
also vowing to stand up to China over its alleged trade and currency abuses.

Obama countered that Romney had invested in companies in China that were
pioneers of outsourcing US jobs, saying: "Governor, you're the last person who's
going to get tough on China."

When Romney interrupted, asking Obama if his pension scheme included investment
in low wage economies abroad, the president openly mocked his wealth.

"I don't look at my pension. It's not as big as yours."

Analysts gave Obama the edge but said the race was far from over.

"The Republicans will be disappointed that Romney didn't put him away, and the
Democrats will be reassured that the president is in full press now," said Linda
Fowler, a government professor at Dartmouth College.

John Pitney, professor of politics at Claremont McKenna College, said he thought
"the president had a much better night than he had in Denver".

"It was close, but I have to give the edge to Obama."

Just 21 days before the election, the obvious antipathy between the candidates
reflected stakes that could hardly be higher as national polls and the race in
battleground states tightens into a dead heat.

The two candidates returned to key swing states yesterday, with Obama holding
rallies in Iowa and Ohio and Romney heading to Virginia.

Romney took the first question of the night, about the jobs crisis, and bemoaned
the plight of ordinary Americans who he said had been "crushed over the last
four years".

"I know what it takes to create good jobs and to make sure you have the
opportunity you deserve," Romney said.

But Obama issued the parting shot of the night, blasting Romney's comments
â[#x20ac]" which came to light last month in a secretly taped video â[#x20ac]"
writing off 47 per cent of American voters who don't pay income taxes as
freeloaders who would vote for Obama in order to keep their government handouts.

"When he said behind closed doors that 47 per cent of the country considered
themselves victims who refuse personal responsibility, think about who he was
talking about," Obama said, pointing out that this included war veterans,
students and soldiers serving in war zones.

"I want to fight for them," he said. "That's what I've been doing for the last
four years. Because if they succeed, I believe the country succeeds."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                     Copyright 2012 Nation Multimedia Group
                              All Rights Reserved
