
                              81 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                                   News Point

                           October 17, 2012 Wednesday

Barack Obama outshines Mitt Romney in New York debate

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: New York


New York, Oct. 17 -- A feistier and forceful Barack Obama appeared to debate his
way back into the game at second faceoff with rather 'grim' Republican rival
Mitt Romney in New York on Tuesday night with one of the first verdicts branding
him the winner of the debate.

The CNN post-debate poll has come out with the results and given it to Obama by
46% to 39%.

46 percent said that Obama won the debate, while 39 percent said Romney fared
better. The seven-point margin falls within the poll's sampling error.

As many as 73 percent said Obama did better than expected, compared to 37
percent who said the same about Romney.

The results offer a stark contrast from the first presidential showdown Oct 3,
when 67 percent of debate watchers said Romney fared better while 25 percent
said Obama won the debate.

But how far his aggressive performance would help Obama get back into the game
is yet to be seen with most media reports describing the race for the White
House as either a virtual tie or Obama have to lose.

Just three weeks ahead of the Big Day November 6, Barack Obama appeared much
more assertive and aggressive than he was at Denver debate and strongly defended
his policies and launched sharp attacks on his rival Romney who had won the
first debate.

Both the rivals clashed over the details of the energy policy, education and
economy, mainly pay equity for women and job prospects.

An upbeat Obama seemed to strongly take on rival Romney, who at times appeared
grim.

Romney reiterated that middle class "has been crushed over the last four years"
and continued lashing out at Obama's record, saying millions of unemployed
people and a sluggish economic recovery showed the president's policies had
failed.

The incumbent gave it back to Romney saying the republican would only favour the
rich if elected.

The 90-minute debate at Hofstra University, moderated by Candy Crowley of CNN
started with a student tossing up a question about his job prospectus. Mitt
Romney was the first one to answer and talked about his 5-point plan, including
his vow to create 12 million jobs during his first term.

Obama, who was determined not to lag behind his rival this time, appeared quite
assertive and told the student named Jeremy that his future is bright, and said
he wants to build on the 5 million jobs his administration has created. He also
took a dig at Romney, for saying he wanted to "let Detroit go bankrupt."
question into his own 5-point plan for boosting the economy, talking about clean
energy among other things.

Obama challenged Romney on economics and energy policy, accusing him of
switching positions and declaring that his economic plan was a "sketchy deal"
that the public should reject. "You'll get your chance in a moment. I'm still
speaking," the former Massachusetts governor said at one point while Obama was
mid-sentence. He said the president's policies had failed to jumpstart the
economy and crimped energy production.

Obama and Romney clashed over taxes, deficit, energy, pay equity for women and
health care issues.

Immigration prompted yet another clash, Romney saying Obama had failed to pursue
the comprehensive legislation he promised at the dawn of his administration, and
the president saying Republican obstinacy made a deal impossible.

Under the format agreed to in advance, members of an audience of 82 uncommitted
voters posed questions to the president and his challenger.

Nearly all of them concerned domestic policy until one raised the subject of the
recent death of the US ambassador to Libya in a terrorist attack at an American
post in Benghazi.

Romney said it took Obama a long time to admit the episode had been a terrorist
attack, but Obama said he had said so the day after in an appearance in the Rose
Garden outside the White House.

When moderator Candy Crowley of CNN said the president had in fact done so,
Obama, prompted, "Say that a little louder, Candy."

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has taken responsibility for the death of
Ambassador L. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans, but Obama said
bluntly, "I'm the president and I'm always responsible. Published by HT
Syndication with permission from News Point. For any query with respect to this
article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


                          Copyright 2012 NewsPoint TV
                              All Rights Reserved
