
                              85 of 1098 DOCUMENTS


                      Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK)

                           October 18, 2012 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Obama slugs it out with Romney in live debate

BYLINE: WMN REPORTERS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 804 words


A fired-up Barack Obama went on a relentless attack in the second presidential
debate in America, but his rival Mitt Romney gave no ground as the two men
clashed repeatedly during angry and at times electric exchanges.

Clearly arriving with a different game plan after his lacklustre performance in
Denver two weeks ago, Obama assailed Romney on his tax rate, his tax plan, his
stance on the auto bailout, women's rights and his plans to stand up to China.

And this time he didn't shy away from personal assaults on Romney's wealth, his
record at Bain Capital and those now infamous secretly recorded remarks on the
"47%" - all of which he failed to mention the first time the pair clashed.

The pair bordered on being physically aggressive, coming toe-to-toe and looming
over each other as they held their hands up at each other on the red-carpeted
stage on Tuesday night.

Democrats - on the verge of panic - have had their nerves steadied after the
debate at Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York.

Obama's in-your-face performance was a major improvement on his display in
Denver, and viewers rated him the winner by a sevenpoint margin in a CNN poll.
But Romney scored a number of points, especially on the economy, and in the CNN
poll only 38% felt Obama had a clear plan for the country, while 50% thought
Romney had one.

Mr Obama blasted Mr Romney's economic plans as damaging to the middle class and
accused him of flip-flopping on issues like energy and gun control.

He appeared angry - a rare emotion seen in the famously cool Mr Obama - when Mr
Romney, a former Massachusetts governor, criticised his response to the deadly
attack that killed the US ambassador to Libya and three other Americans at the
US Consulate in Benghazi last month.

He pointedly told Mr Romney that any suggestion that his administration "would
play politics or mislead when we've lost four of our own, governor, is
offensive.

That's not what we do".

The stakes of the town hallstyle debate at Hofstra University, just outside New
York, could not have been higher.

With just three weeks to go before Election Day, the race is locked in a dead
heat and many Americans are already casting ballots in states that allow early
voting.

The open-stage format, with no physical objects between them, placed incumbent
and challenger face to face and, when they chose, directly in each other's
faces.

Their physical encounters crackled with energy and tension, and the crowd
watched raptly as the two sparred while struggling to appear calm and affable
before a national television audience of tens of millions.

It is not clear whether the debate will help Mr Obama regain the momentum he
lost after his poor performance in the October 3 debate, which helped fuel a
rise in opinion polls for Mr Romney.

But his forcefulness was bound to cheer supporters disheartened by his previous
delivery. Mr Romney also gave his supporters reasons to cheer. He appeared
confident and comfortable, as he had been in the first debate, and aggressively
returned Mr Obama's fire.

Mr Romney said the middle class "has been crushed over the last four years", and
that 23 million Americans are struggling to find work.

Economic growth has been slow throughout Mr Obama's term in office, and
unemployment only recently dipped below 8% for the first time since he moved
into the White House. Mr Romney noted that if out-of-work Americans who no
longer look for jobs were counted, the unemployment rate would be 10.7%.

Mr Romney described the deadly Libya attack as part of an unravelling of the
administration's foreign policy.

He said it took Mr Obama a long time to admit the episode had been a terrorist
attack, but Mr Obama said he had said so the day after the attack in an
appearance at the White House. When moderator Candy Crowley of CNN said the
president had in fact done so, Mr Obama, prompted: "Say that a little louder,
Candy."

Mr Romney also repeated a pledge to declare China a currency manipulator on his
first day in office.

"We can compete with anyone in the world as long as the playing field is level,"
he said. "China's been cheating over the years by holding down the value of its
currency and stealing intellectual property."

Mr Obama told Mr Romney that "you're the last person who's going to get tough on
China".

He has charged that Mr Romney made money from companies that outsourced jobs to
China while running the private equity firm Bain Capital. The two men
interrupted one another often, speaking over each other to the point that
neither could be understood.

"You'll get your chance in a moment. I'm still speaking," Mr Romney said as he
tried to cut off Mr Obama at one point.

Mr Obama is fighting to hang on to small leads in many of the nine key swing
states that likely will decide the election.

'Middle class has been crushed over the last four years' Mitt Romney

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2012

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Barack Obama speaks as the Republican presidential candidate,
former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, listens during the second
presidential debate at Hofstra University, New York PICTURE: CAROLYN KASTER

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WMN


                 Copyright 2012 Western Morning News (Plymouth)
                              All Rights Reserved
